arXiv:1612.08071v5 [math.LO] 12 Oct 2017

On How the Introducing of a New θ Function Symbol Into
Arithmetic’s Formalism Is Germane to Devising Axiom Systems
that Can Appreciate Fragments of Their Own Hilbert Consistency
Dan E.Willard∗
State University of New York at Albany

Abstract

A new θ function primitive is proposed that almost achieves the
combined efficiency of the addition, multiplication and successor
growth operations. This θ function symbol enables the constructing
of an “IQFS(PA+)” axiom system that can corroborate a fragmentary definition of its own Hilbert consistency, while it will simultaneously verify isomorphic counterparts of all Peano Arithmetic’s
Π1 theorems. Many propositions and intermediate results are also
established. Only one intermediate result, which most readers will
intuit should be true, does remain formally unproven.

Keywords and Phrases: Gödel’s Second Incompleteness Theorem, Consistency, Hilbert’s Second
Open Question, Hilbert-styled Deduction (and its Frege-like analogs).
Mathematics Subject Classification: 03B52; 03F25; 03F45; 03H13
Comment: All the theorems and propositons are the same in this Version 5 as in Version 4. The
difference is that the writing style is now significantly more polished.

∗

This research was partially supported by the NSF Grant CCR 0956495.

1

Introduction

Two historic results were established by Gödel’s millennial paper [20]. The First Incompleteness
Theorem showed no decision procedure exists for identifying all the true statements of Arithmetic.
The Theorem XI in [20], later known as the “Second Incompleteness Theorem”, demonstrated no
extension of the Russell-Whitehead Principia Mathematicae formalism can verify its own consistency. Gödel’s two observations were historic because they demonstrated, unequivocally, that the
initial objectives of Hilbert’s Consistency Program were much too far-reaching. Thus at best, only
a sharply curtailed form of Hilbert’s goals would be plausible.
These observations were reinforced by a new version of the Second Incompleteness Theorem,
due to the combined work of Pudlák and Solovay [39, 44], enhanced by some added techniques of
Nelson and Wilkie-Paris [35, 49]. It established the prohibition (stated in §3’s Theorem ++) that
no conventional arithmetic formalism can verify its own “Hilbert-style” consistency, when it merely
recognizes Successor as a formally total functional operation.
Within such curtailed limits, we have published since 1993 a series of articles [50]-[59], outlining
generalizations of the Second Incompleteness Theorem and its sometimes-feasible boundary-case
exceptions. Pavel Pudlák examined an early preprint of our article [55] and suggested [41] we
consider attempting to hybridize its formalism with some of Ajtai’s observations about the Pigeon
Hole effects [3]. On a more informal basis during a lunch at a 1997 conference, Sam Buss [10]
conveyed to us an approximately similar suggestion. The Section 6 of [55] did subsequently formalize
one type of response to these insightful observations. Our new results in this current paper will
examine a much more ambitious approach to [55]’s particular topic, that is germane to an arithmetic
appreciating some very delicately defined fragments of its Hilbert-styled formalizations of its self
consistency.
During our discussion, Add(x, y, z) and M ult(x, y, z) will denote two 3-way predicate symbols
specifying that x + y = z and x ∗ y = z, which are known by our formalism to satisfy Π1 encodings
for axioms formalizing the associative, commutative, identity and distributive principles. Let us
say an axiom system α recognizes successor, addition and multiplication as Total Functions iff
it can additionally prove (1) - (3) as theorems.
∀x ∃z

Add(x, 1, z)

(1)

∀x ∀y ∃z

Add(x, y, z)

(2)

∀x ∀y ∃z

M ult(x, y, z)

(3)

Our studied axiomatizations for integer arithmetics will differ from their conventional counterparts
by neither possessing an ability to prove any of the totality statements (1) - (3) above, nor containing
function symbols for formalizing the traditional addition, multiplication and successor function
operations. Instead, we will rely upon an entirely new different type of primitive function, called
1

the “ θ ” operator, to construct the endless sequence of integers 3, 4, 5, ... from merely the three
initial starting constants of 0, 1 and 2. (The exact number of logical symbols for encoding a term
Tn , that represents an integer n ≥ 3 , will satisfy either an O( Log3 n ) or O( Log n ) upper bound
under our Propositions 4.3 and 7.1, depending on whether a tree, as opposed to a Dag-oriented
methodology, is used to encode Tn .)
Assuming only the very modest assumptions of our Conjecture 6.6 are true 1 , Theorem 6.7
will imply any consistent arithmetic axiom system A (including Peano Arithmetic itself ) can be
mapped onto a consistent axiom system “IQFS(A)”, where IQFS(A) can simultaneously :
1. corroborate its own Hilbert consistency,
2. confirm the validity of all A’s Π1 theorems in a slightly revised language that uses the preceeding Add(x, y, z) and M ult(x, y, z) 3-way predicate symbols, and
3. use only the three starting constants of 0, 1 and 2, to construct any term Tn for representing
any natural number n ≥ 3, while satisfying Propositions 4.3 and 7.1’s specified O( Log3 n )
and O( Log n) bounds for the length of Tn ’s construction.
Items 1-3 are potentially significant because [55]’s earlier ISCE formalism could achieve the first
two objectives, only when it had used an unfortunately infinite number of constant symbols.
Theorem 6.7’s result should be viewed, cautiously, as only a boundary-case evasion of the Second
Incompleteness Theorem. This is because its “IQFS(A)” formalism will be too weak to treat even
Successor as a total function. Yet assuming our Conjecture 6.6 is correct (as the Appendix will
demonstrate it is nearly 100 % certain to be), the semantics of IQFS shall partially answer an open
question, that was raised by Harvey Friedman, at the end of the fourth lecture within his 5-part
year-2014 You Tube series [18].
It concerned whether some exotic boundary case exceptions to the Second Incompleteness Theorem might exist. The intuition behind IQFS(A)’s improved behavior will be that Proposition 4.3’s
θ primitive will capture much of the growth properties of the addition, multiplication and successor
operations, without employing those of their special functionalities, that are known to particularly
support [39, 44]’s broad-scale generalizations of the Second Incompleteness Theorem.
The present article, fortunately, can be read without examining any of our previous papers. If
a reader does wish to skim one of our earlier articles, we recommend Sections 3 & 4 of [55]. (The
reading of [55] is optional because a later chapter will summarize its content in more than adequate
detail.)
1

Conjecture 6.6 is the result, mentioned in the abstract, which shall be demonstrated to be almost certainly true
by the appendix attached to §6.

2

2

Returning to the 1931-1939 Period

Gödel’s Second Incompleteness Theorem was published in two stages during the 1931-1939 period. Its initial 1931 announcement, formalized by Theorem XI in Gödel’s millineal paper [20],
demonstrated that no extension of the Russell-Whitehead Principia Mathematicae formalism could
corroborate its own consistency. The widely quoted more general result, that every consistent r.e.
extension of Peano Arithmetic must be unable to corroborate its own consistency, was, technically,
first published in the 1939 edition of the Hilbert-Bernays textbook [27]. The latter has been considered to be the first definitive2 demonstration of the broad reach of the Second Incompleteness
Effect. Its formalism established, beyond any reasonable doubt, that any kind of axiom system
corroborating its own consistency must rely upon a foundational structure different from Peano
Arithmetic. (This is because the Hilbert-Bernays textbook formalized the forerunner of what is
now known as the Hilbert-Bernays Derivability Conditions [27, 25, 33, 34], as a mechanism for
envisioning the broad generality of the Second Incompleteness Effect.)
It is, thus, fascinating that Hilbert, as a co-author of an important generalization of the Incompleteness Theorem, never withdrew the justification [26] for his consistency program:
∗ “ Let us admit that the situation in which we presently find ourselves with respect to paradoxes
is in the long run intolerable. Just think: in mathematics, this paragon of reliability and truth,
the very notions and inferences, as everyone learns, teaches, and uses them, lead to absurdities.
And where else would reliability and truth be found if even mathematical thinking fails?”

Indeed, Hilbert always insisted that some special new formalism would at least partially vindicate
the prior goals of his consistency program. He thus arranged to have its often-quoted motto (“Wir
müssen wissen—Wir werden wissen” ) engraved on his tombstone 3 .
It is known [12, 22, 61] that Gödel was also doubtful about the generality of the Second Incompleteness Theorem for at least two years after its publication. He thus inserted the following
historically noteworthy caveat into his famous 1931 millennial paper [20]:
∗ ∗ “It must be expressly noted that Theorem XI” (e.g. the Second Incompleteness Theorem)
“represents no contradiction of the formalistic standpoint of Hilbert. For this standpoint presupposes only the existence of a consistency proof by finite means, and there might conceivably
be finite proofs which cannot be stated in P or in ... ”

The statement ∗∗ has had numerous different interpretations 4 . All Gödel’s biographers [12, 22,
61] have noted his intention (prior to 1930) was to establish Hilbert’s proposed objectives, before
2
Boolos [8] states there has been some debate among scholars whether Peano Arithmetic’s precise generalization
of the Second Incompleteness Theorem should be fully credited to Gödel’s seminal paper [20], as opposed to having
been implicit from it. In any case, the Hilbert-Bernays textbook [27] vented this generalization in its 1939 second
edition, and von Neumann (unpublished) is also known [12, 22, 61] to have made similar observations.
3
English translation: “We must know, We will know.”
4
Some scholars have interpreted ∗∗ as anticipating attempts to confirm Peano Arithmetic’s consistency, via either
Gentzen’s formalism or Gödel’s Dialetica interpretation. Other scholars have viewed ∗∗ as having more ambitious
goals in 1931 (that is, goals which Gödel essentially formally withdrew later).

3

he proved a result leading in the opposite direction. Yourgrau [61] records how von Neumann
surprisingly “argued against Gödel himself ” in the early 1930’s, about the definitive termination
of Hilbert’s consistency program, which “for several years” after [20]’s publication, Gödel “was
cautious not to prejudge”. It is known Gödel began to more fully endorse the Second Incompleteness
Theorem during a 1933 lecture [21], and he completely embraced it after learning about Turing’s
work [47].
Our research in [50]-[59] is related to issues similar to those raised by Hilbert and Gödel in
statements ∗ and ∗∗. This is because it is awkward to explain how human beings can maintain the
psychological drive and needed energy-desire to cogitate, without being stimulated by an instinctive
faith in their own consistency (under a definition of such that is suitably gentle and soft to be
consistent with the Incompleteness Effect).
Accordingly, our research in [50]-[59] has explored both generalizations and boundary-case exceptions for the Incompleteness Effect, so as to determine exactly which boundary-case evasions are
permissible. Our prior research in [50]-[59] used mostly cut-free forms of deduction to evade the
restrictions imposed by the Second Incompleteness Effect. The current article will instead focus on
the more pristine Hilbert-Frege methods of deduction. Assuming the tempting assumptions of our
Conjecture 6.6 are correct (as we do), the present article will show how a new type of θ function
symbol, employing an “indeterminate-styled” definition of growth (formalized in §4), will usher in
a surprising evasion of the Second Incompleteness Effect.
More details about θ will be explained in the next two sections. Essentially, θ is needed because
a version of the Second Incompleteness Theorem, due to the combined work of Pudlák, Solovay,
Nelson and Wilkie-Paris [35, 39, 44, 49], demonstrates that if an axiom system α proves merely
any one of (1) - (3)’s totality statements, then it will be incapable of confirming its own consistency
under a Hilbert-style deductive method.
Our Theorem 6.7 will suggest it is possible to obtain a partially positive interpretation for what
Hilbert and Gödel were seeking in their statements ∗ and ∗∗, in a context where it is known the
Second Incompleteness Effect, clearly, precludes a full achievement of their earlier objectives.

3

Motivation for Research and its Broad Perspective

It is helpful to employ a flexible vocabulary so our results will apply to any of the textbook
formalisms of say Enderton, Fitting, Hájek-Pudlák, or Mendelson [13, 15, 25, 34]. Let us call an
ordered pair (α, d) a “Generalized Arithmetic” iff its two components are defined as follows:
1. The Axiom Basis “ α ” of an arithmetic is defined as its set of proper axioms it employs.
2. The Deductive Apparatus “ d ” of an arithmetic is defined as the combination of its formal
rules for inference and the built-in logical axioms “ Ld ” that are used by these rules.
4

Example 3.1 This notation allows one to conveniently separate the logical axioms Ld ,
associated with (α, d) , from the “basis axioms” α . It also allows one to isolate and compare
various apparatus techniques, including the dE , dM , dH , and dF methods defined below:
i.

The dE apparatus, introduced in §2.4 of Enderton’s textbook, uses only modus ponens as a
rule of inference. The latter will be accompanied by a 4-part system of logical axioms, called
LdE , to endow dE with an ability to support Gödel’s Completeness Theorem.

ii.

The dM apparatus in §2.3 of Mendelson’s textbook and the dH apparatus in §0.10 of the
Hájek-Pudlák’s textbook employ a more compressed set of logical axioms than dE , in a
context where they use two rules of inference (modus ponens and generalization). In the end,
dM and dH prove the same set of theorems as dE with only minor and unimportant
changes in proof length.

iii.

The “semantic tableaux” dF apparatus in Fitting’s and Smullyan’s textbooks [15, 43] was
the main focus of our investigations in [50, 51, 53, 54, 56, 59]. It will be rarely used in the
current article, however. Unlike dE , dM and dH , it employs no logical axioms. It instead
uses more complicated rules of inference. It has many applications in automated deduction,
but is less efficient than dE , dM and dH in worst-case environments.
Definition 3.2 The term “Hilbert-style” deductive method shall refer to any deductive

apparatus d which employs a modus ponens rule and also satisfies Gödel’s Completeness Theorem.
(Thus, each of the dE , dM and dH are examples of Hilbert-style deductive methodologies.)
Example 3.3 Some added notation is needed to explain why a Hilbert style deductive apparatus, such as dE , dH or dM , should be distinguished from dF ’s “tableaux” apparatus. Let
Add(x, y, z) and M ult(x, y, z) again denote two 3-way predicate symbols specifying that x + y = z
and x ∗ y = z. Also, let us recall an axiom basis “ α ” is said to recognize successor, addition and
multiplication as “Total Functions” iff (4)-(6) are among its derived theorems.
∀x ∃z

Add(x, 1, z)

(4)

∀x ∀y ∃z

Add(x, y, z)

(5)

∀x ∀y ∃z

M ult(x, y, z)

(6)

An “axiom basis” α is called Type-M iff it includes (4)-(6) as theorems, Type-A if it includes (4)
and (5) as theorems, and Type-S if it contains only (4) as a theorem. Also, α is called Type-NS
iff it can prove none of these theorems. A summary of the prior literature, using this particular
notation, is provided below:
a.

The combined research of Pudlák, Solovay, Nelson and Wilkie-Paris [35, 39, 44, 49], as

is formalized by statement ++ , implies no natural Type-S generalized arithmetic (α, d) can
5

recognize its own consistency when d is one of Example 3.1’s three Hilbert-style deduction
operators of dE , dH or dM :
++

(Solovay’s modification [44] of Pudlák [39]’s formalism with Nelson and

Wilkie-Paris [35, 49]’s methods) : Let (α, d) denote a generalized arithmetic supporting the Line (4)’s Type-S statement and assuring the successor operation will
satisfy both x′ 6= 0 and x′ = y ′ ⇔ x = y.

Then (α, d) cannot verify its own

consistency whenever simultaneously d is a Hilbert-style deductive apparatus and
α treats addition and multiplication as 3-way relations, satisfying their usual associative, commutative distributive and identity axioms.
Essentially, Solovay [44] privately communicated to us in 1994 an analog of theorem ++.
Many authors have noted Solovay has been reluctant to publish his nice privately communicated results on many occasions [11, 25, 35, 37, 39, 49]. Thus, approximate analogs of ++
were explored subsequently by Buss-Ignjatovic, Hájek and Švejdar in [11, 23, 45], as well as in
Appendix A of our paper [51]. Also, Pudlák’s initial 1985 article [39] captured the majority
of ++’s essence, chronologically before Solovay’s observations. Also, Friedman did related
work in [16].
b.

Part of what makes ++ interesting is that [51, 54, 55] developed two methods for generalized arithmetics to confirm their own consistency, whose natural hybridizations are precluded
by ++. Specifically, these results involve either a Type-NS system [51, 55] verifying its own
consistency under any of our three discussed variants of Hilbert-style methods, or a Type-A
system [50, 51, 54, 56, 59] verifying its self-consistency under dF ’s tableaux apparatus. Also,
Willard [52, 57] observed how one could refine ++ with Adamowicz-Zbierski’s methodology
[1, 2] to show Type-M systems cannot recognize their semantic tableaux consistency.

The roles of Items (a) and (b) in our research will become more evident as this article progresses.
Essentially, our prior research had focused mostly on Type-A arithmetics that could verify their
consistency under either semantic tableaux deduction or some near-cousin of this concept (as was
explained in [59]’s short 16-page summary of [50]-[58]’s results). The main challenge, faced by
our prior research, was that

+ + ’s generalization of the Second Incompleteness Theorem for

Type-S arithmetics caused us to rely on analogs of [55]’s “ISCE” Type-NS framework, when a logic
recognizes its own Hilbert consistency. (The latter, unfortunately, dropped the assumption that
successor is a total function. It instead constructed the infinite set of integers by employing an
infinite set of distinct constant symbols C1 , C2 , C3 , .... where Cj = 2j−1 .) In this article, we will
improve upon ISCE by showing how one needs only three built-in constant symbols, corresponding
to the integers of 0, 1 and 2, to construct an “IQFS” axiom system that can verify its own Hilbert
consistency − − − where here IQFS has access to a new type of “ θ ” function primitive (defined
later) for constructing the infinite range of integers from these three starting constants.
6

Definition 3.4 Let α again denote an axiom basis, and d designate a deduction apparatus.
Then the ordered pair (α, d) will be called a Self Justifying configuration when:
i one of (α, d)’s theorems (or possibly one of α’s axioms) do state that the deduction method d,
applied to the basis system α, produces a consistent set of theorems, and
ii the axiom system α is in fact consistent.
Example 3.5 Using Definition 3.4’s notation, our prior research in [50, 51, 54, 55, 58, 59]
developed arithmetics (α, d) that were “Self Justifying”. It also proved the Second Incompleteness
Theorem implies specific limits beyond which self-justifying formalisms cannot transgress. For any
(α, d) , it is almost trivial to construct a system αd ⊇ α that satisfies the Part-i condition (in an
isolated context where the Part-ii condition is not also satisfied). For instance, αd could consist of
all of α ’s axioms plus an added “SelfRef(α, d)” sentence, defined as stating:
⊕

There is no proof (using d’s deduction method) of 0 = 1 from the union of the

axiom system α with this sentence “SelfRef(α, d) ” (looking at itself).
Kleene discussed in [29] how to encode rough analogs of the above “I Am Consistent” axiom
statement. Each of Kleene, Rogers and Jeroslow [29, 42, 28], however, emphasized that αd may be
inconsistent (e.g. violating Part-ii of self-justification’s definition), despite SelfRef(α, d)’s formalized
assertion. This is because if the pair (α, d) is too strong then a classic Gödel-style diagonalization
argument can be applied to the axiom system αd = α + SelfRef(α, d), where the added presence
of the statement SelfRef(α, d) will cause this extended version of α , ironically, to become automatically inconsistent. Thus, the encoding of “SelfRef(α, d)” is relatively easy, via an application
of the Fixed Point Theorem, but this sentence is ironically typically useless!
Unlike our earlier work, which focused mostly on a semantic tableaux apparatus for deduction,
the current paper will explore Definition 3.2’s more pristine Hilbert-style methodologies. There
are, of course, many types of generalizations of the Second Incompleteness Theorem known to arise
in Hilbert-like settings [4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 11, 14, 16, 20, 23, 24, 25, 27, 33, 30, 31, 36, 38, 39, 40, 44, 45,
48, 49, 51, 55]. Each such generalization formalizes a paradigm where self-justification is infeasible
under a Hilbert-style apparatus.
Our main prior research about Hilbert consistency appeared in [55]. Its ISCE(β) formalism
could recognize its own Hilbert consistency and prove analogs of any r.e. extension β of Peano
Arithmetic’s Π1 theorems. It unfortunately required the use of an infinite number of constant
symbols, with ISCE(β) using one built-in constant symbol Ci , for each power of 2.
Prior to [55]’s publication, Pavel Pudlák [41] examined our article and asked whether one could
improve upon ISCE’s properties by using Ajtai’s observations [3] about the Pigeon Hole principle.
7

In a briefer and more informal respect, Sam Buss asked us a similar question during a lunch at a
1997 logic conference [10]. Our prior partial answer to these questions was offered in Sections 6 of
[55]. A different and substantially more interesting reply to these questions will be offered in the
current paper.
Definition 3.6 Relative to any fixed given axiom system γ , a formal function symbol F
will be called a Q-Function iff γ is sufficiently ambiguous for there to exist an UNCOUNTABLY
infinite number of different plausible sequences of formally enumerated ordered pairs ( i , ai ) in
expression (7) where F (i) = ai is allowed as a permissible representation for F under γ’s axioms.
(0, a0 ) , (1, a1 ) , (2, a2 ) , (3, a3 ) , (4, a4 ) ...

(7)

Most Q-Function symbols are unsuitable for analyzing Hilbert’s Second Open Question or most
issues in mathematics. This is because the presence of an uncountably infinite number of different
plausible sequences, using Line (7) to specify F (i) = ai , is more of a burden than a benefit (in
most cases). An exception to this general rule of thumb will be provided by the next section’s θ
operator. It will be germane to ++ ’s generalization of the Second Incompleteness and suggest a
mechanism whereby an efficient form of “Type-NS”self-justifying arithmetic can recognize its own
Hilbert consistency in a quite substantial sense.

4

Starting Notation Conventions

A function H will be called Non-Growth whenever H(a1 , a2 , ..., aj ) ≤ M aximum(a1 , a2 , ..., aj )
for all a1 , a2 , ..., aj . Six examples of non-growth functions are:
1. Integer Subtraction where “ x − y ” is defined to equal zero when x ≤ y,
2. Integer Division where “ x ÷ y ” equals 0 when y = 0 and it equals ⌊ x/y ⌋ otherwise,
3. M aximum(x, y),
4. Root(x, y) which equals ⌊ x1/y ⌋ when y ≥ 1 (and zero otherwise),
5. Logarithm(x) = ⌊ Log2 (x) ⌋ and
6. Count(x, j) = the number of “1” bits among x’s rightmost j bits.

These operations were called either the “Grounding” or “Ground-Level” functions in our articles [51, 53, 54, 59]. We will use the latter nomenclature in the current article because the notion of
a “Ground-Level” function should not be confused with the very different notion of a “Grounded
Term” employed by Definition 4.5.
Our starting language LG will also contain the two atomic symbols of “ = ” and “ ≤ ” and
three built in constants symbols, C0 , C1 and C2 , for representing the values of 0, 1 and 2.
In this context, expressions (8) and (9) formalize exactly how addition and multiplication can be
encoded as two 3-way predicates, denoted as Add(x, y, z) and Mult(x, y, z).
z − x = y

∧
8

z ≥ x

(8)

z−1
z
=y ∧
<y )]
(9)
x
x
and C2 , for representing the quantities 1 and 2, allow us to

[ (x = 0 ∨ y = 0) ⇒ z = 0 ] ∧ [ (x 6= 0 ∧ y 6= 0 ) ⇒ (
Also, our constant symbols, C1

formalize the following further non-growth operations:
a.

Pred(x)
=
x − 1 (in a context where the prior paragraph’s definition for Subtraction implies
Pred(0)= 0. )
b. Half(x) = x ÷ 2 (in a context where “ x ÷ 2 ” equals technically ⌊ x2 ⌋ under the prior paragraph’s
notation).
c. Predn (x) defined to be n iterations of the Predecessor operation
d. Half n (x) defined to be n iterations of the halving operation.

Let us say that a function symbol H(x1 , x2 ...xj ) is Growth Permitting iff for each integer
k ≥ 2 there exists a “growth-tuple” (a1 , a2 , .., aj ) satisfying H(a1 , a2 , .., aj ) > k and also having
each ai ≤ k It will be necessary to employ either an infinite number of constant symbols or some
Growth-Permitting function, so that an extension of our language LG can construct the naturally
extended broader set of integers 3, 4, 5, 6 .... from its starting objects of 0,1 and 2.
One method for resolving this problem has been presented in [55]. Its ISCE(β) axiom basis did
employ an infinite number of further constant symbols. It was compatible with self-justification,
but deviated from Hilbert’s intended goals because it employed a highly awkward infinite number
of distinct constant symbols.
The challenge posed by ++ is, thus, formidable. Our goal in this article will be to suggest how
a Q-function primitive F (x), constrained by deliberately ambiguous axioms, can help overcome the
constraint that ++ imposes. Such an unusual primitive F will have an uncountable number of
vectors, analogous to Line (7), as permissible solutions for F ’s definition. Our basic goal will be
to outline how this unusual concept is germane to the self-justifying aspirations that Hilbert and
Gödel had expressed in ∗ and ∗ ∗ .
Definition 4.1 Let us say a formal function symbol F (x1 , x2 , ...xj ) is “1-Definitive” iff it has
only one permissible solution under an axiom system γ’s definition of it. Let us call the function
F “Indeterminate” otherwise.
Mathematicians obviously typically avoid using axiom systems that entail using ambiguous
function definitions (e.g. they certainly usually avoid analogs of Line (7)’s dizzying quantity of
possibly ℵ1 distinct solutions for its defined function F ). Our effort to overcome ++’s broad-scale
generalization of the Second Incompleteness Theorem will be unconventional because we will use
an indeterminate function, called the θ operator, to overcome ++’s challenge. It will turn out
that the θ operator will almost duplicate the logarithmic efficiency of the traditional addition
and multiplication function symbols for constructing the natural numbers, while simultaneously
dove-tail around ++’s generalization of the Second Incompleteness Theorem.
9

The indeterminate nature of θ will be crucial to our evasion of the Second Incompleteness Effect.
Our research into this topic was greatly influenced by an email we received from Pavel Pudlák [41],
shortly after he received an advanced copy of our article [55]. He appreciated the nature of the
challenge the ISCE axiom framework faced, when it used an awkwardly infinite number of constant
symbols. (ISCE relied on this infinite magnitude to evade ++’s requirement that no evasion of
the Second Incompleteness Theorem can take place when an arithmetic recognizes Successor as a
total function.) Pudlák’s emailed communications [41], thereby suggested we look at Ajtai’s work
[3] about a Pigeon-Hole function ζ(x) , defined by the identities (10) and (11).

∀ x
∀ x

∀ y

ζ(x) 6= 0

x 6= y ⇒ ζ(x) 6= ζ(y)

(10)
(11)

The relevance of ζ can be best appreciated when ζ n (x) denotes a term ζ( ζ( ...ζ(x))) consisting
of n iterations of the ζ operator. Line (12)’s composite term Sn will then satisfy the lower
bound of Sn > n.

Sn

=

Max[ ζ(0) , ζ 2 (0) , ζ 3 (0) , ... ζ n (0) ]

(12)

Pudlák observed ζ(x) will grow too slowly (in the worst case) for one to be able to deduce successor
is a total function from its properties 5 . His email [41] hinted the inequality Sn > n might enable
a formalism, utilizing the ζ operative, to improve upon [55]’s results.
It was initially unclear whether a positive answer to Pudlák’s interesting question would resolve
ISCE’s main difficulties. This is because (12)’s term Sn requires O( n2 ) logic symbols to encode
an integer quantity greater than n (since its term ζ j (0) uses O(j) logic symbols). Thus, the
integer 2100 ,

whose binary encoding uses 100 bits, would actually require in excess of 2200

bits to encode. Such quantities, exceeding the number of atoms in the universe, were troubling
because our general goal has been to construct self-justifying arithmetics that possessed, at least,
some partial facets of pragmatic value.
The remainder of this section will outline how a different type of Q-Function operator will
be much better than ζ for meeting our needs. During our discussion, Power(x) will denote a
primitive specifying x is a power of 2 . It is encoded by (13) because our Grounding language
has “Logarithm(x) ” = ⌊ Log2 (x) ⌋ .
x=1

∨

Logarithm( x ) 6= Logarithm( x − 1 )

5

(13)

The operation ζ(x) will grow at a slower rate than Successor, if it equals x + 1 for all standard numbers x and
if ζ(x) = x − 1 when x is a non-standard integer. This seemingly minute detail implies one cannot infer Successor is
a total function from ζ’s behavior, since the latter is contradicted by a model where all non-standard numbers have
sizes bounded by some fixed number B. (This subtle detail, raised by Pudlák’s email [41], was fascinating because it
raised the question about whether a partial exception to Example 3.3-a’s invariant ++ might plausibly exist.)

10

In this context, θ(x) will denote our new analog of the ζ(x) function that walks among the powers
of 2 in a manner similar to ζ(x)’s walk through conventional integers. It is defined by (14)-(17).
∀ x

Power(x)
∀ x

∀ x

∀ y

⇒ Power( θ(x) )

(14)

θ(x) 6= 1

(15)

[ x 6= y ∧ Power(x) ] ⇒ θ(x) 6= θ(y)

∀ x

¬ Power(x)

⇒

θ(x) = 0

(16)
(17)

It needs to be emphasized that (14) – (17) will be the only vehicle our self-justifying axioms have
available to construct integers ≥ 3.

These axioms will be called the Up-Walking axioms.

(The axiom (17) is, technically, unnecessary to construct integers ≥ 1 , but it is helpful because it
formalizes how our methodology will treat integers which are not powers of 2.)
Both the Q-functions ζ and θ are challenging because there are a dizzying ℵ1 distinct vectors,
analogous to Line (7), that are representations of these functions. We will soon see, however, that
there is a sharp distinction between these concepts from a computational complexity perspective.
Definition 4.2 Let LQ and LQ

∗

denote the extensions of LG ’s Grounding language that

contain the respective additional function symbols of θ and ζ. Then
Q-Grounding language, and

LQ

∗

LQ shall be called the

will be called the Q* Grounding language.

Proposition 4.3 In contrast to the Q* Grounding language that requires O( n2 ) function
symbols for defining a term Tn∗ for representing the integer n, the Q-Grounding language needs
only O( Log 3 n ) symbols to encode a term Tn representing n.
Proposition 4.3’s proof will rely upon the following notation convention:
Definition 4.4 Let θ j (x) denote the term θ( θ( ...θ(x))) where there are j iterations of
the θ operation. Let Ej denote the quantity produced by (18)’s division operation:
Max [ θ j (1) , θ j−1 (1) , ... θ(1) ]
Half j { Max [ θ j (1) , θ j−1 (1) , ... θ(1) ] }

(18)

It is easy to establish that Ej = 2j for every j ≥ 1. This is because (18)’s twice-repeating term of
Max [ θ j (1), θ j−1 (1), ...θ(1) ] is a power of 2 exceeding 2j . For the additional case where j = 0 ,
we shall define E0 = 1 (by having the formal constant symbol of C1 stand for “1” ).
Proof of Proposition 4.3: Easy consequence of Definition 4.4’s machinery. Thus if n is a
power of 2 of the form 2j then expression Ej is a term representing n ’s value that employs
O( Log 2 n ) logical symbols. On the other hand, if n is not a power of 2 then it can be defined
with O( Log 3 n ) symbols by setting Ej equal to the least power of 2 greater than n and
subtracting from Ej those powers of 2 that are needed to produce n ’s value. For example since
76 = 128 − 32 − 16 − 4 , it can be formalized as a term T76 defined by E7 − E5 − E4 − E2 .
11

Definition 4.5 A “term” in mathematical logic is defined to be a syntactic object, built out
of solely symbols for representing functions, constants and variables. Such an object is called a
“Ground Term” when it is built out of solely function and constant symbols. For example in our
Q-Grounding language (which uses C0 , C1 and C2 as built-in constants), the expression “ C2 − C1 ”
is a ground term. Two more complex examples of ground terms are “Max(C2 , C1 − C0 )” and
“Max( θ(C1 ) , C2 )”. Also, expression Ej in Line (18) should be viewed as a ground term (when
one views its use of the symbol “1” as an abbreviation for the constant “ C1 ”).
Remark 4.6 . We will distinguish in Proposition 7.1 and in other parts of §7 between two kinds
of ground terms, that are called the “Tree-Oriented” and “Dag-Oriented” formats. The latter
will differ from a more conventional tree structure by having a Directed Acyclic Graph structure
replace a term’s usual tree format for defining its quantitative values. Our discussion in the next
several sections will be simplified if we use the shorter phrase of “Ground Term” to refer to what
§7 will more accurately called a “Tree-Oriented Ground Term”. (It will turn out Proposition 7.1
will later explain how Dag-oriented ground terms differ from their tree-oriented counterparts by
reducing the O( Log 3 n ) length of a tree-oriented term to a more compact O( Log n ) size.)
Definition 4.7 A ground term T will be called an “Observable” object iff there is an unique
interpretation of its quantified value in the Q-Grounding language. It is called an “Unobservable”
iff it has multiple such interpretations due to θ’s “indeterminate” definition (e.g. see Definition 4.1).
Example 4.8 The previously mentioned ground term Max( θ(C1 ) , C2 ) is an “unobservable”
because it can assume any of the plausible integer values of 2 , 4 , 8 , 16 ... . On the other hand,
(19) is an “observable” that represents the integer value of “3”. (This is because its twice-repeating
term “ Max[ C2 , θ(C2 ) , θ 2 (C2 ) ] ” is bounded below by 4, causing the left and right sides of its
subtraction operation to differ by exactly 3.)
Max[ C2 , θ(C2 ) , θ 2 (C2 ) ] − Pred 3 { Max[ C2 , θ(C2 ) , θ 2 (C2 ) ] }

(19)

Our notation also implies that Line (18)’s expression Ej is an “observable”. This implies, in turn,
that Proposition 4.3’s term Tn is an “observable” employing no more than O( Log 3 n ) logical
symbols. For example since 76 = 128 − 32 − 16 − 4 , it follows that T76 corresponds to the
observable term E7 − E5 − E4 − E2 , where each Ej employs only O( Log 2 j ) symbols.
Thus, Definition 4.7 and Example 4.8 have illustrated how the realm of “observable” objects is a
broad and accessible world, of non-trivial significance. It allows every integer n to be represented
by a term Tn with a tight O( Log 3 n ) length (in a context where Proposition 7.1’s more elaborate
formalism will allow us to reduce this length to a yet more attractive O( Log n ) size).
The distinction between “Observables” and “Unobservables” will offer a new perspective on
the aspirations which Hilbert and Gödel stated in their statements ∗ and ∗∗, under the new IQFS
12

axiomatic framework that is proposed later in this article. It will suggest how the Second Incompleteness Theorem can be seen as a fascinating majestic result from a purist perspective, while a
well-defined fragment of what Hilbert and Gödel sought in ∗ and ∗∗ can be satisfied, in at least a
diluted sense.
Remark 4.9 (explaining the goals of this paper): Let us say a basis axiom system α
owns a “Finitized Perspective” of the Natural Numbers if it requires only a finite number of proper
axioms to construct the full set of integers 0, 1, 2, 3 ... . All conventional arithmetics have this
property. Such logics fall into two categories, called Single and Double-Formatted systems. They
are defined below:
a.

Single-Formatted Arithmetics consist of axiomatic basis systems whose ground terms are
all Observables. (Most conventional arithmetics lie in this category because they typically
employ the Successor operation in a traditional manner.)

b.

Double-Formatted Arithmetics represent systems whose ground terms may be either Observables or Unobservables. (Axiomizations for Q-Grounded logics are “Double-Formatted”
because they allow θ’s analog of Line (7)’s function symbol F to have an uncountable number
of different allowed representations).

The distinction between categories (a) and (b) is significant because Example 3.3-a explained how
statement ++’s generalization of the Second Incompleteness Theorem applies to any formalism
recognizing Successor as a total function. Thus, Double-Format logics are useful, if one wishes
to consider alternatives where successor is not seen as a total function. In this context, Hilbert’s
Second Open Problem can be viewed as a 2-part question, composed of sub-queries Q-1 and Q-2:
Question Q-1

Are any axiom systems able to prove theorems verifying their own consistency in

a robust sense?

The answer to Q-1 is clearly “No” because the combination Gödel’s initial

1931 result [20] with Hilbert-Bernays’s result [27] and the Pudlák-Solovay invariant ++ (from
Example 3.3-a) imply arithmetics of ordinary strength cannot prove their own consistency in
a robust sense.
Question Q-2

Can logic systems “appreciate” their own consistency in some REDUCED

sense, that is diluted but not fully immaterial?

The answer to Q-2 is complex because some

logics, such as our proposal in §5 and [50, 51, 54, 55, 58, 59]’s weaker and earlier paradigms,
can formalize their own consistency, using Example 3.5’s Fixed-Point “I am consistent” axiom.
A theme of this article will be that the distinguishing between questions Q-1 and Q-2 and
between Single and Double-Formatted Logics is related to the mystery enshrouding the Second
Incompleteness Theorem. This is because there can be no doubt that the Second Incompleteness
Theorem is fully robust from a purist mathematical perspective. Yet, it is still problematic to fully
13

dismiss Hilbert’s 1926 suggestion that some specialized forms of logics should possess a type of
well-defined knowledge about their own internal consistency. (This is because it is very awkward
to explain how human beings are able to motivate their own cognitive process, otherwise.)
Thus the distinguishing between the questions Q-1 and Q-2, combined with Example 3.5’s
“SelfRef”formalism and Proposition 4.3’s “θ primitive”, will usher in our new approach.
Before discussing our new “IQFS” methodology, it should be mentioned that other unusual
interpretations of the Second Incompleteness Theorem have followed from Gentzen’s perspectives
about transfinite induction under his ǫ0 ordinal [19, 46], the Kreisel-Takeuti’s “CFA” system [32]
and also the interpretational frameworks of Friedman, Nelson, Pudlák and Visser [17, 35, 39, 48].
These systems are unrelated to our methods. They do not use Kleene-like “I am consistent” axiomsentences. Also, they employ “cut-free” logics (rather than a preferable Hilbert-style deductive
apparatus). Their fascinating perspective should be examined by researchers interested in the
Second Incompleteness Theorem, although it is unrelated to our approach in the next section.

5

The ISCE and IQFS Axiomatic Formalisms

The only aspect of our prior research that will be directly related to our new IQFS axiomatic
framework is [55]’s ISCE formalism. The next several paragraphs will review [55]’s defintions of
ISCE, given in its Sections 3 & 4. After reviewing ISCE’s properties, the remainder of this section
will explain, intuitively, how our new IQFS framework can be incrementally defined, by suitably
revising ISCE’s prior definition. (A subsequent formal proof, affirming IQFS’s exact self-justification
properties, will appear in §6.)
During our discussion, LG will again denote our Grounding-level language built out of our
six basic non-growth functions (e.g. the Subtraction, Division, Maximum, Logarithm, Root and
Count operations). Also, C0 , C1 and C2 will again denote three constant symbols designating
the integers values of “0”, “1” and “2”. In a context where Pred(x) is an abbreviation for “ x − 1 ”
(or more precisely “ x − C1 ” ), the ISCE axiom system from [55] had used (20)’s axiom statement
to define C0 , C1 and C2 :
Pred(C0 ) = C0 ∧ C1 6= C0 ∧ Pred(C1 ) = C0 ∧ Pred(C2 ) = C1 ∧ ∀ x ¬ ( C0 < x < C1 ) (20)
The challenge [55] faced was its formalism could not use any of the function-operations of successor,
addition or multiplication to infer the existence of larger integers from the initial constants of C0 ,
C1 and C2 . This was because the Pudlák-Solovay result ++ indicated the presumption successor
is a total function precludes most systems from recognizing their own Hilbert consistency.
Our article [55] considered two alternatives for overcoming these difficulties, called the Additive and Multiplicative Naming conventions. They defined some further constant symbols

14

C3 , C4 , C5 , ... and C3∗ , C4∗ , C5∗ , ... where Cj = 2j−1 and Cj∗ = 2 2

j−2

under these two

conventions.
The definition of these constants is easy under LG ’s language. This is because Lines (8) and
(9) specify how two 3-way predicates, called Add(x, y, z) and Mult(x, y, z) , encode the identities of
x = y+z and x∗y = z. Our additive and multiplicative conventions can, then, define C3 , C4 , C5 , ...
and C3∗ , C4∗ , C5∗ , ... via an infinite number of instances of (21) and (22)’s particular axiom schemas,
respectively:

Add( Cj−1 , Cj−1 , Cj )

(21)

∗
∗
Mult( Cj−1
, Cj−1
, Cj∗ )

(22)

The methodology in [55] presumed the “names” for its constants Cj and Cj∗ had nice compact
encodings using O( Log(j) ) bits. Its formalism calculated the values of “unnamed” integers
from named entities via the non-growth Subtraction and Division primitives. For instance since
20 = 32 − 8 − 4 , the quantity 20 can be encoded as C6 − C4 − C3 .
The challenge [55] faced was to determine whether self-justification was possible under either
(21)’s or (22)’s schema. It found (22)’s multiplicative convention was incompatible with selfjustification (due to its speedy growth rate), but (21)’s additive schema did, conveniently, permit
self-justification.
Our new proposed Double-Formatted form of a self-justifying axiom system is easiest to describe,
if we first review [55]’s Single-Formatted formalism and then refine it.
The extension of our base-language LG that includes the Additive Naming Convention (ANC)’s
additional constants C3 , C4 , C5 , ... will be called an ANC-Based Language and be denoted
as LAN C . Also if t denotes any term in LAN C ’s language, then the quantifiers in the two wffs of
∀ v ≤ t Ψ(v) and ∃ v ≤ t Ψ(v) will be called LAN C ’s “Bounded Quantifiers”.

Definition 5.1 The analogs of a conventional arithmetic’s ∆0 , Πn and Σn formulae in the
C , ΠAN C and ΣAN C . Thus, a formula is defined to be
language LAN C will be denoted as ∆AN
n
n
0
C iff all its quantifiers satisfy the prior paragraph’s bounding condition. The definitions of
∆AN
0
C and ΣAN C formulae, in Items 1-3, are also quite conventional:
ΠAN
n
n
C formula is considered to be also a ΠAN C and an ΣAN C expression.
1. Every ∆AN
0
0
0
C when it can be encoded as ∀v ... ∀v Φ where Φ is ΣAN C
2. A formula is called ΠAN
1
k
n
n−1
C when it can be encoded as ∃v ... ∃v Φ, where Φ is ΠAN C .
3. A formula is called ΣAN
1
k
n
n−1

15

Given an initial axiom system β, the Theorem 3 of [55] did formalize a self-justifying logic,
C theorems and which could also verify its own
called ISCE(β), that could prove all β ’s ΠAN
1

consistency under any Hilbert-style deductive apparatus (including the dE , dM and dH deductive
methodologies) The axiom basis for ISCE(β) was comprised, formally, of the following four distinct
groups of axioms:
GROUP-ZERO: This schema will use Line (20)’s axiom to define the constants of C0 , C1 and
C2 and Line (21)’s Additive Naming schema to define the further constants C3 , C4 , C5 , ...
GROUP-1: It is convenient to define ISCE’s Group-1 schema using a notation that will support
[55]’s Theorem 3 in a more general sense than had appeared in [55], so that our new “IQFS”
formalism (appearing later in this section) will be easier to describe. Let us therefore say a
C sentence is Simple iff the only built-in constants it employs are C , C and C . Then
ΠAN
0
1
2
1
C axioms, called
ISCE’s Group-1 scheme will be allowed to be any finite set of simple ΠAN
1

S , that is consistent with the Group-zero schema and which has the following properties:
C
1. The union of S with ISCE’s Group-Zero axioms will be capable of proving all ∆AN
0

statements which are true.
2. The union of S with ISCE’s Group-Zero scheme will also be capable of proving that
the “=” and “≤” predicates support their conventional transitivity, reflexivity, symmetry
and total ordering properties.
C axioms with the above properties can be used to define S and
Any finite set of ΠAN
1

support an analog of [55]’s Theorem 3, by an easy generalization 6 of the methodologies from
Sections 3 and 4 of [55]. (Thus, any such finite set S supporting Conditions (1) and (2) can
be employed to define ISCE’s Group-1 axiom schema.)
C formula
GROUP-2: Let p Φ q denote Φ’s Gödel number, and HilbPrfβ (x, y) denote a ∆AN
0
C
indicating y is a Hilbert-styled proof from axiom system β of the theorem x. For each ΠAN
1
C axiom of the form:
sentence Φ, the Group-2 schema for ISCE(β) will contain a ΠAN
1

∀y

{ HilbPrf β ( pΦq , y ) ⇒ Φ }

(23)

C sentence
GROUP-3: This last part of [55]’s ISCE(β) formalism is a single self-referencing ΠAN
1

stating:
⊕⊕

“There exists no Hilbert-style proof of 0=1 from the union of the Group-0,

1 and 2 axioms with THIS SENTENCE (referring to itself)”.
C
Clarifying ⊕⊕’s Meaning: Several of our articles [51, 54, 55, 58] employed self-referential ΠAN
1

constructions, similar to ⊕ ⊕ , as the Example 3.5 did mention. A reader can, thus, find several
illustrations about how ⊕ ⊕ is encoded in these articles.
6

A proof of this specific generalization of [55]’s results is entirely routine. For the sake of brevity, it is omitted.

16

Definition 5.2 Let I( • ) denote an operation that maps an initial axiom basis β onto an
alternate system I(β) . (One example of such an operation is the ISCE( • ) framework, that maps
an initial axiom basis of β onto the alternate formalism of ISCE(β). ) Such an operation I( • )
is called Consistency Preserving iff I(β) is consistent whenever the union of β with the Groups
0 and 1 axiom schemas is consistent.
Example 5.3 Several of our research projects had employed Definition 5.2’s framework. For
instance, [55] demonstrated the ISCE( • ) mapping was consistency preserving. Thus if PA+ denotes the extension of Peano Arithmetic that includes PA’s traditional Addition and Multiplication
functions plus LG ’s six added Grounding-level function primitives, then ISCE( PA+ ) must automatically be consistent (because PA+ was consistent). Hence while Peano Arithmetic is unable
to verify its own consistency (on account of Gödel’s seminal 1931 discovery), it is known to be
sufficiently agile to prove the following relative-consistency statement:
#

If PA is consistent then ISCE( PA+ ) is self-justifying.

The preceding relative-consistency statement provides a partial positive answer to the Q-2 version of Hilbert’s Second Question. It captures one respect in which ISCE( PA+ ) can appreciate its
own consistency. This respect is, obviously, of a sharply limited nature because ++’s generalization
of the Incompleteness Theorem indicates no Type-S arithmetic can recognize its Hilbert consistency
and view successor as a total function. It does, however, raise an enticing question:
# # Can the infinite number of distinct constant symbols, employed by ISCE’s GroupZero schema, be reduced to a finite size by a Type-NS Self-Justifying Logic in some
type of formal manner?
The next two sections of this paper will outline how a quite encouraging answer to # # ’s query
shall arrive, when one modifies ISCE’s formalism with the Q-function operative of θ .
Definition 5.4 Let LQ once again denote the special extension of LG ’s Grounding language
Q
Q
that includes the added new Q-function symbol of θ. Then ∆Q
0 , Πn and Σn will denote the
C , ΠAN C and ΣAN C ’s formulae under LQ ’s modified language. In
analogs of Definition 5.1’s ∆AN
n
n
0
C , ΠAN C or ΣAN C formula, then ΦQ will be called ∆Q , ΠQ
particular, if Φ is one of an ∆AN
n
n
n
0
0

or ΣQ
n when it differs from Φ by exactly replacing each constant CJ from the set C3 , C4 , C5 ...
with Line (18)’s term EJ−1 .
C , ΠAN C or ΣAN C sentence that employs the three
Example 5.5 Suppose Φ is one of a ∆AN
n
n
0

constant symbols of C4 , C6 and C10 for representing the three numbers of 8, 32 and 512. Let us
recall that E3 , E5 and E9 formulate these three quantities under Line (18)’s notation. Then ΦQ
will have an identical definition as Φ except each Cj is replaced by Ej−1 .
17

Q
Q
A formula is, moreover, defined to lie in one of the ∆Q
0 , Πn or Σn classes if and only if it is

constructed in exactly such a manner. This fact ensures that all the main primary terms employed
in our three major classes of sentences are “Observable” terms. Hence “Unobservable” ground terms
are allowed in LQ ’s language, but they are excluded from occurring as the “end-product primary”
Q
Q
terms in the ∆Q
0 , Πn or Σn theorems that do encapsulate the intended use of our formalism. We

will need one more preliminary definition before “IQFS” can be defined.

Definition 5.6 Let us recall that Example 3.1 defined three examples of Hilbert-style deductive
methodologies.. The symbol dER will denote the particular version of Hilbert-style deduction that
we will use in this article. It will be a minor revision of Enderton’s dE apparatus (that was
mentioned in Example 3.1). Unlike Enderton’s schema, it will not take all tautologies as axioms.
Instead, it will use the following three axiom schemas, from Mendelson’s textbook [34], to prove all
tautologies as theorems:
I. B ⇒ ( C ⇒ B )
II. [ B ⇒ ( C ⇒ D ] ⇒ [ ( B ⇒ C ) ⇒ ( B ⇒ D ) ]
III. [ ( ¬C ) ⇒ ( ¬ B ) ] ⇒ { [ ( ¬ C) ⇒ B] ⇒ C }
This approach is preferable because the problem of identifying tautologies is NP-hard (e.g. it is
preferable to avoid viewing tautologies as axioms and to instead employ the axiom schemas I-III to
prove tautologies as theorems). Thus, the logical axioms of dER shall consist of the axiom schemas
I-III plus the below schemas 2-4 from §2.4 of Enderton’s textbook. The deductive apparatus dER
will also follow [13]’s example by treating ∀ x Ψ automatically as a logical axiom whenever Ψ is
a logical axiom.
2.

∀ x φ(x) ⇒ φ(t) when t is substitutable for x in φ.

3.

∀x(φ ⇒ ψ) ⇒

4.

ψ ⇒ ∀x ψ when x does not occur free in ψ.

{(∀xφ) ⇒ (∀xψ)}

The symbol LdER will henceforth denote this set of six basic logical axiom schemas (e.g. items
I-III combined with 2-4). Our dER deduction methodology will follow Enderton’s example by using
modus ponens as its only employed rule of inference 7 .
The remainder of this section will combine the formalisms of Defintions 5.4 and 5.6 to define
our new axiom system, IQFS(β), that can prove all β ’s ΠQ
1 theorems as well as recognize its own
consistency under dER ’s form of Hilbert-style deduction. In essence, IQFS(β) will be the direct
7

Unlike several other textbooks, Enderton [13] does not view generalization as a formalized rule of inference
because he takes Items (3) and (4) as logical axioms.

18

analog of [55]’s ISCE(β) axiom system (when the logic’s base language is changed from LAN C to
C to ΠQ theorems).
LQ and our focus changes from ΠAN
1
1

Definition 5.7 The acronym “IQFS” stands for “Introspective Q-Function Semantics”. In a
context where β is an initial axiom system that proves theorems in the language LQ , the system,
IQFS( β ) will be designed to be a 4-part formalism, analogous to ISCE(β), that can prove all β’s
ΠQ
1 theorems and recognize its own consistency. In essence, IQFS(β)’s definition will be identical
to ISCE(β), except for the following four changes (three of which are trivial):
a.

The GROUP-ZERO schema of IQFS will differ from ISCE’s analog by replacing Line (21)’s
“Additive Naming” schema with the Up-Walking axioms, from Lines (14)–(17). (This is
because the language LQ differs from LAN C by having the Q-function operator of θ define
the formal quantities that are represented by the constant symbols of C3 , C4 , C5 .... under
LAN C . ) In order to assure that the four Up-Walking axioms are adequate to determine Ej
is numerically equivalent to Cj+1 , our new Group-Zero schema will include Line (20)’s axiom
(for defining the starting constants of C0 , C1 and C2 ) as well as (24)’s added axiom:
∀ x { [ Power(x) ∧ x ≥ 2 ] ⇒

b.

x
= 2}
Half(x)

(24)

The GROUP-1 scheme of IQFS will be identical to ISCE’s counterpart, except it will reflect
Item a’s modification of the Group-Zero scheme for LQ ’s particular revised language (e.g.
the footnote 8 describes this easily straightforward revision of ISCE’s Group-1 scheme.)

c.

All the ΠQ
1 axioms lying in IQFS’s GROUP-2 scheme will be identical to their counterparts
C senunder ISCE, except they will employ Definition 5.4’s machinery for translating ΠAN
1

tences into their equivalent ΠQ
1 counterparts. In particular, let us assume the Gödel number
“ pΦq ” is defined via the “Byte-Style” encoding method (defined in the next section) and
HilbPrfβ (x, y) denotes a ∆Q
0 formula indicating y is a Hilbert-styled proof of the theorem x
from axiom system β. Then for each ΠQ
1 sentence Φ, IQFS(β)’s Group-2 schema will contain
a ΠQ
1 axiom of the form:
∀y
d.

{ HilbPrf β ( pΦq , y ) ⇒ Φ }

(25)

The GROUP-3 axiom of IQFS will be essentially similar to ISCE’s Group-3 “I am consistent”
axiom, except the latter’s notion of “I” will trivially reflect the above changes in the Groups
0, 1 and 2 schemes. It will, thus, be a ΠQ
1 sentence declaring that:

In a context where a ΠQ
1 sentence is called “Simple” when it contains no Ej term with j ≥ 2 , the Group-1
scheme of IQFS will be analogous to ISCE’s counterpart by consisting of any finite set of simple ΠQ
1 axioms, called
S ∗ , that is consistent with Group-zero schema and which has the following properties:
8

1. The union of S ∗ with IQFS’s Group-Zero axioms will be capable of proving all ∆Q
0 statements which are true.
2. The union of S ∗ with IQFS’s Group-Zero scheme will also be capable of proving that the “=” and “≤”
predicates support their conventional transitivity, reflexivity, symmetry and total ordering properties.
The above two properties are the 1-to-1 analogs of their counterparts used by ISCE’s Group-1 scheme. As was the
∗
case with ISCE’s formalism, any finite set of simple ΠQ
1 axioms with the above properties can be used to define S .
∗
Once again, it is unimportant which particular finite-sized definition for S is used.

19

⊕ ⊕ ⊕ “Under Definition 5.6’s Hilbert-style deductive methodology, there will exist
no proof of 0=1 from the union of the preceding axioms with THIS SENTENCE
(looking at itself )”.
Readers familiar with our previous papers [50, 51, 54, 55] about “I am consistent” axioms
should be able to appreciate, intuitively, it is feasible to formulate a ΠQ
1 encoding for ⊕ ⊕ ⊕.
This fourth part of our definition of the IQFS’s axiom system should, however, be articulated
in greater detail because it is more complicated than IQFS(β)’s other three parts. Therefore,
the next chapter’s Lemma 6.3 will formalize precisely how ⊕ ⊕ ⊕ is endowed with a ΠQ
1
encoding.
Our main goal will be to show that IQFS satisfies Definition 5.2’s Consistency-Preserving property, analogous to [55]’s ISCE methodology. The particular virtue of IQFS is that it needs only
three starting constants, C0 , C1 , and C2 , to define the full infinity of natural numbers, unlike ISCE.
(Moreover, our Proposition 4.3 will imply IQFS can encode every integer n efficiently with a term
Tn with an O{ [ Log(n) ]3 } length, and Proposition 7.1 will show this quantity can be reduced to
a yet-more-efficient logarithmic size, when ground terms are encoded as directed acyclic graphs.)

6

Main Results about IQFS

Our main results about the IQFS formalism will be proven in this chapter. Its discussion will be
divided into two parts where:
1. Section 6.1 will formalize the encoding of ⊕ ⊕ ⊕ ’s Group-3 axiom (e.g. the Item (d) from
Definition 5.7).
2. Section 6.2 will display our main theorems about IQFS’s consistency-preservation property.

6.1

The ΠQ
1 Encoding for IQFS’s Group- 3 Axiom

Before discussing how to endow ⊕ ⊕ ⊕ with a ΠQ
1 encoding, it is necessary to first outline our
methodology for generating a proof’s Gödel number. It will be analogous to the natural B-adic
encoding methods used by Buss [9], Hájek-Pudlák [25] and Wilkie-Paris [49] — insofar as the
number of utilized bits to encode a semantic object will be approximately proportional to the
length of such an expression written by hand. We will say a byte is a string of 6 bits, and encode
each proof as an integer, written in base 64, comprising a sequence of bytes. Our encoding will use
less than 32 logical symbols; thus, each symbol will be encoded by an unique integer between 32
and 63. These symbols shall include:
1. The standard connective symbols of ∧, ∨, ¬, ⇒, ∀ and ∃.
2. The left and right parenthesis symbols, and also a comma symbol (to separate terms) and a period
symbol (to specify the end of a sentence)

20

3. Seven function symbols for representing our six grounding functions and the new θ primitive.
4. The relation symbols of “ = ” and “ ≤ ”.
5. The symbol V̂ for designating the presence of a basic variable symbol.
6. Three constant symbols to represent the built in constants of 0, 1 and 2.

The V̂ symbol is somewhat different from our other logical symbols because there are an infinite
number of different variable names that may occur in a proof. The j−th variable will be represented
by a sequence of 1 + ⌈ Log32 (j + 1) ⌉ bytes, where the first byte encodes the V̂ symbol and the
remaining bytes encode j as a Base-32 number.
Definition 6.1 Let α denote a set of proper axioms. Then the symbol AxiomCheckα (x) will
denote a predicate formula that yields a value of True when x is the Gödel number of one of α’s
axioms. Also, ProofCheckα (s) will denote a formula that is True when s represents a byte string
for a proof, whose proper axioms come from α and whose logical axioms and deductive apparatus
were formalized by Definition 5.6’s “dER ” formalism. The relationship between these two concepts
is formalized by Lemma 6.2.
Q
Lemma 6.2 The predicate ProofCheckα (s) is ∆Q
0 encodable whenever AxiomCheckα (x) is ∆0

encodable. (The latter condition does hold for the majority of r.e. axiom systems α.)
Proof Summary: It is well known that Lemma 6.2 holds for classic arithmetics that use ∆0
encodings, instead of ∆Q
0 encodabilities. (There are many proofs of this fact. One can use the fact
that Wrathall’s notion of LinH functions are known [25, 31, 60] to have the property that a formula
has a ∆0 encoding if and only if it can be corroborated by a LinH decision procedure.) A similar
paradigm trivially generalizes for ∆Q
0 encodings. Other routine details about Lemma 6.2’s proof
are omitted for the sake of brevity.



Lemma 6.2 is obviously trivial, but it was worth mentioning because we will use it during one
of the footnotes in Lemma 6.3’s proof.
Lemma 6.3 The Group-3 axiom of IQFS(β), introduced informally by Definition 5.7’s statement ⊕ ⊕ ⊕, can be formally encoded as a ΠQ
1 axiom sentence.
Proof. Let UNION(β) denote the union of IQFS(β)’s Group-Zero, Group-1 and Group-2
axioms (given in Items a-c of Definition 5.7) ). We will also use the notation conventions below:
i.

Prf U N ION (β) ( t , p ) will denote a formula designating that p is a proof of the theorem t
from the axiom system UNION(β), using Definition 5.6’s deduction method dER .

ii. ExPrf U N ION (β) ( h , t , p ) will be a formula stating that p is a proof (using deduction method
dER ) of a theorem t from the union of the axiom system UNION(β) with an added axiom
whose Gödel number equals h .
21

iii. Subst ( g , h ) will denote Gödel’s classic substitution formula — which yields TRUE when g
is an encoding of a formula and h is an encoding of a sentence that replaces all occurrence
of free variables in g with the Gödel-encoded term

g .

iv. SubstPrf U N ION (β) ( g , t , p ) will denote the natural hybridizations of the constructs from
Items (ii) and (iii). It will yield a Boolean value of TRUE exactly when there exists some integer h simultaneously satisfying both the conditions Subst ( g , h ) and ExPrf U N ION (β) ( h , t , p ).
Each of (i)–(iii) can be easily 9 encoded as ∆Q
0 formulae .
lustrates one possible ∆Q
0

In such a context, Line (26) il-

encoding for SubstPrf U N ION (β) (g, t, p)’s graph. (It is equivalent to

“ ∃ h [ Subst(g, h) ∧ ExPrfU N ION (β) (h, t, p) ] ” , but Line (26) is a ∆Q
0 formula — unlike the
quoted expression.)
Prf U N ION (β) ( t , p )

∨

∃ h ≤ p [ Subst ( g , h ) ∧ ExPrf U N ION (β) ( h , t , p ) ]

(26)

Utilizing (26)’s particular ∆Q
0 encoding for SubstPrfU N ION (β) (g, t, p), it is easy to encode
IQFS(β)’s Group-3 axiom, specified by Definition 5.7’s statement ⊕ ⊕ ⊕, as a ΠQ
1 sentence.
Thus, let Γ(g) denote Line (27)’s formula, and let n denote Γ(g)’s Gödel number. Then
“ Γ( n ) ” is a ΠQ
1 sentence encoding IQFS(β)’s Group-3 axiom.
∀p

¬ SubstPrf U N ION (β) ( g , p 0 = 1 q , p )

(27)

In other words, ⊕ ⊕ ⊕ is encoded as: “∀ p ¬ SubstPrf U N ION (β) ( n , p0 = 1q , p )”.

Remark 6.4 We shall not provide IQFS(β)’s Groups 1 and 2 axioms with ΠQ
1 encodings,
similar to Lemma 6.2’s construction. Such is unnecessary because these Group-1 and Group2 axioms have obvious encodings, unlike the preceding encoding of IQFS(β)’s Group-3 axiom,
described above.

6.2

Main Conjecture and Main Theorem

This section will introduce our main conjecture and accompanying theorem. The attached appendix
will provide evidence, very strongly suggesting that Conjecture 6.6 is correct. This evidence shall
almost reach the critical-mass level of amounting to a proof. We will begin our discussion by
introducing one preliminary definition, that will help facilitate the relationship between Conjecture
6.6 and Theorem 6.7.
Definition 6.5 A ΠQ
1 sentence ∀ x φ(x) will be said to be a Size K Breaking Pont iff φ(K)
is false and φ(x) is true for all x < K .
9

In particular, the ∆Q
0 encodings for Items (i) and (ii) are immediate consequences of Lemma 6.2.

22

Conjecture 6.6 Suppose γ is an axiom system that includes:
A. All IQFS’s Group-zero and Group-1 axioms (from Definition 5.7 ),
B. A set of additional ΠQ
1 axiom statements, all of which hold true in the Standard Model, except
for one special ΠQ
1 sentence, called Ψ, that constitutes a Size K Breaking Pont (with K > 2).
Suppose P is a proof from γ of 0 = 1 (using again Definition 5.6’s dER deductive method).
Then P , viewed as a Gödel number, will impose the following constraint on K ’s magnitude
Log2 K

1
Log2 P
6

<

(28)

We are essentially 100 % confident that Conjecture 6.6 is true. Indeed, Line (28)’s estimate of an
upper bound on K’s length is actually an excessively conservative over-estimate. An approximate
intuitive justification of this inequality is provided in the attached appendix. (It actually falls
only one tiny iota short of being a formal proof.) Our immediate goal is to discuss and prove the
Theorem 6.7. We recommend that the reader postpone examining the Appendix’s justification of
Conjecture 6.6, until after Theorem 6.7 and its proof have been both first read.
Theorem 6.7 The Conjecture 6.6 does imply that IQFS’s axiomatic framework satisfies
Definition 5.2’s Consistency Preservation property. (E.g. that if β is an axiom system consistent
with IQFS’s Group-0 and 1 axioms then IQFS(β) is also consistent.)
Proof. Similar to the Consistency Preservation analysis in our earlier papers, the proof of
Theorem 6.7 will be a proof by contradiction.
Let UNION(β) once again denote the union of IQFS(β)’s Group-Zero, Group-1 and Group-2
axioms. If Theorem 6.7 was false then it easily follows that all the axioms in UNION(β) will hold
true in the standard model, but IQFS(β) will be contradictory. We will show this is impossible.
In particular, if IQFS(β) was contradictory, then there must exist a minimal sized proof of 0 = 1
from IQFS(β), called say P . We call the reader’s attention to the fact that UNION(β) consists of
all of IQFS(β)’s axioms, except for its Group-3 axiom. Lemma 6.3 showed that IQFS(β)’s Group-3
axiom can be encoded as a ΠQ
1 sentence of the form:
∀x

ψ(x)

(29)

Then since P denotes the minimal proof of 0 = 1 and since IQFS(β)’s Group-3 axiom states
“There exists no proof of 0 = 1 from IQFS(β)”, it follows that this italicized sentence is false.
Thus, Line (29) must own a Size−K Breaking Point, for some K.
The Conjecture 6.6 indicates K < P (because of (28)’s inequality). This is impossible because
P was defined to be the minimal proof of 0 = 1 , and K represents a smaller such proof of 0 = 1 .
Hence, the IQFS( • ) framework must be consistency-preserving to avoid this contradiction.
23



Remark 6.8 Our earlier Consistency Preservation results in [50, 51, 54, 58] also relied upon
proofs-by-contradiction, mostly analogous to Theorem 6.7’s verification. One important distinction
is, however, that Theorem 6.7’s proof employed Conjecture 6.6’s paradigm as an intermediate step.
There are good reasons for believing this conjecture is correct. In particular, the attached appendix
provides strong evidence confirming this conjecture, in a context where its informal justification
falls only one small iota short of being a fully formalized proof. At this juncture, we encourage the
reader to take a quick glance at the Appendix’s justification for Conjecture 6.6.

7

Further Results and Useful Added Perspectives

Both the virtues and drawbacks of the IQFS formalism are consequences of Proposition 4.3’s characterization of the O{ [ Log(n) ]3 } quantity of logical symbols used for encoding an integer n as
a grounded term Tn . Thus, this quantity is clearly significantly better than the alternate O( n2 )
length that arises when the θ function symbol is replaced by the less efficient primitive ζ ,
defined by Lines (10) and (11). On the other hand, one would ideally prefer our ground terms
to resemble conventional encodings of a binary number that use O{ Log(n) } logical symbols to
encode an arbitrary number n .
It turns out it is possible to improve Proposition 4.3’s encodings to such a compressed O{ Log(n) }
size, if one adds only a minor wiggle to the logic’s notation convention. This distinction arises because most traditional logic languages formalize Definition 4.5’s “Ground terms” as tree-like structures. An easy alternative mechanism will allow these terms to own the more generalized structure
of a Directed Acyclic Graph (Dag).
Traditionally, this distinction has been viewed as an unimportant wrinkle because it can be easily
proven that almost every Dag-oriented term can be converted into its Tree-oriented counterpart with
usually only a Polynomial increase in length. The reason for our special interest in Dag-formulated
ground terms is that the IQFS formalism possesses access only to the specialized θ primitive for
generating growth among integers. Thus, Proposition 7.1 will indicate that Proposition 4.3’s earlier
ground terms can have their lengths nicely compressed from an O{ [ Log(n) ]3 } size into a more
enticing O{ Log(n) } magnitude, when a Dag notation is employed.
Proposition 7.1 Let us consider a Dag-analog of §4’s formalism where once again:
1. θ is the only available growth permitting function symbol,
2. the only built-in constant symbols are, again, C0 , C1 and C2 , for representing 0, 1 and 2,
3. and the three function symbols for representing integer-subtraction, integer-division and the
maximum operation are, once again, available.
In this context, any integer n can be encoded by a Dag-oriented Ground term Gn using only
O{ Log(n) } logical symbols. (As the pointers needed to separate these O{ Log(n) } logical objects
24

use O{ LogLog(n) } bits, the total amount of memory required for encoding a Dag-oriented Ground
term will employ at most O{ Log(n) · LogLog(n) } bits.)
The proof for Proposition 7.1 rests essentially on a more elaborate version of §4’s justification
of Proposition 4.3. It uses the fact that Proposition 4.3’s ground term Tn do have many repeating
subterms that can be compressed into single objects under a Dag-style notation.
Detailed Proof: It is easy to convert the preceding paragraph’s summary of the intuition
behind Proposition 7.1 into a formal proof. Let Gn denote our Directed Acyclic Graph (Dag) for
representing an integer n, and let M be an abbreviation for the quantity ⌈ 1 + Log2 (n) ⌉ . Our
directed graph Gn will consist of approximately 5 · Log(n) nodes. The first five of its six groups
of nodes in Gn ’s graph are defined below in bottom-up order:
1. The bottom-most nodes in Gn ’s graph will correspond to the three built-in constant symbols
of C0 , C1 and C2 , that represent the values of 0, 1 and 2.
2. Let θ j (x) denote the term θ( θ( ...θ(x))) where there are j iterations of the θ operation.
For each j ≤ M , the next j levels of Gn ’s directed graph will define nodes Aj that formalize
the quantity θ j (1) . In a context where A0 is an abbreviation for C1 , the remaining Aj
are defined by:
Aj

=

θ( Aj−1 )

(30)

3. For each j ≤ M , let Bj denote the value of Max(A0 , A1 , A2 , ..., Aj ). In a context where B0
is an abbreviation for the entity C1 , the remaining Bj are defined chronologically in Gn ’s
directed graph by:
Bj

=

Max(Aj , Bj−1 )

(31)

4. For each j ≤ M , let Dj denote the value of 2−j · BM . In a context where D0 is equivalent
to the prior entry BM in our directed graph, the remaining Dj nodes in our graph will be
defined via (32)’s Division operation:
Dj

=

Dj−1
2

e.g.

Dj

=

Dj−1
C2

(32)

5. For each j ≤ M , the node Ej will represent the quantity 2j . These nodes in Gn ’s graph
will be defined by (33)’s Division operation:
Ej

=

DM
DM −j

(33)

Some added notation is needed to describe the last part of Gn ’s graph for formalizing n’s representation as a Dag-oriented ground term employing O{ Log(n) } logic symbols. Let Tn denote
Proposition 4.3’s formulation of n as a Tree-oriented ground term, and Gn denote its Dag counterpart (using the five intermediate steps itemized above). Our prior proof of Proposition 4.3 noted Tn
25

was constructed by setting EM equal to the least power of 2 greater than n and then subtracting
from it those powers of 2 which are needed to produce the quantity n.
The exact same methodology will now be used to construct our Gn representation of n , except
we will now obviously use the methodologies from Items 1-5 to assure no more than O{ Log(n) }
graph nodes are used to construct all Line (33)’s Ej terms. (For example since 86 = 128−32−8−2
which in turn equals “ E7 − E5 − E3 − E1 ”, the final stage of our construction of G86 will first set
node F1 equal to “ E7 − E5 ”, then set node F2 equal to “ F1 − E3 ” and lastly have the output
node F3 represent the final answer as the quantity of “ F2 − E1 ”.)
It is easy to see that this methodology will never use more than O{ Log(n) } logical symbols
to encode Gn as a Dag-oriented ground term. Moreover, the needed pointers in the Dag graph
Gn will require no more than LogLog(n) bits to distinguish between these O{ Log(n) } separate
objects. Hence if one selects to use a pointer methodology to formulate Gn ’s graph, then no more
than O{ Log(n) · LogLog(n) } bits will be needed to encode all these pointers (as the last sentence
of Proposition 7.1 had claimed).



Remark 7.2 . Let IQFS∗ denote the analog of our IQFS framework that has Proposition 7.1’s
Dag-oriented Ground Terms replace §4’s earlier Tree-oriented Ground Terms in an accordingly
revised language. A construction exactly analogous to Theorem 6.7 will show IQFS∗ also satisfies
the Consistency Preserving paradigm, assuming (as we do again) that Conjecture 6.6 is correct.
Thus, IQFS∗ is a better formalism, although somewhat more complicated to describe.
Remark 7.3 . It should be mentioned that the infinite number of axiom sentences, appearing
in the Group-2 schemas for ISCE(β), IQFS(β) and IQFS∗ (β), can be nicely reduced to a purely
finite sizes, with almost no loss in information. This was done in [59] for the Group-2 scheme
of its ISD (β) formalism, with the latter producing isomorphic counterparts of all of β ’s full set
of Π1 theorems (e.g. see Sections 5 and 6 of [59]). The same methods will routinely generalize
for the ISCE, IQFS and IQFS∗ frameworks. It will imply that easy modifications of IQFS(PA+)
and IQFS∗ (PA+), owning a strictly finite number of axiom sentences, are able to prove isomorphic
counterparts of the full infinity of Π1 theorems, produced by Peano Arithmetic
Remark 7.4 There is one other amendment to the IQFS and IQFS∗ formalisms that should
be mentioned because of its pragmatic significance. Let Sj denote (34)’s sentence. Let IQFSR and
IQFS∗R denote the minor modifications of IQFS and IQFS∗ that include S1 , S2 , S3 , ... as axioms.
Ej − Ej−1

=

Ej−1

(34)

The addition of these Sj as axioms cannot possibly affect IQFS’s consistency because each Sj is
provable from the Group-Zero and Group-1 axioms as a theorem. The advantage of treating such
Sj as such built-in axioms (rather than as theorems) is that many of IQFS(β)’s other theorems can
have their proofs conveniently shortened in length in this case.
Remark 7.5 Our proposed θ primitive is likely to be of philosophical interest, quite apart from
its implications for Hilbert’s Second Open Question. This is because:
26

1. It is interesting that the θ primitive, combined with the non-growth subtraction, division
and maximum operands, can represent any integer n with a complexity comparable to the
O( Log(n) ) sized representations of an integer under its conventional binary encoding. Does
this suggest the foundational reasoning capacities of either a child or of the anthropological
predecessors of modern man possess access to a technique for reasoning that constructs the
natural numbers without the traditional uses of the addition and multiplication functions?
There is likely to be no easy yes-or-no answer to this question. (Our suspicion is that an
infant-child’s primitive thoughts rely upon an analog of θ’s basic indeterminate functionality.)
2. Also, it is philosophically curious whether or not the Group-2 axioms of Definition 5.7’s IQFS
formalism capture the majority of the engineering implications of Peano Arithmetic? This
is because one may wonder whether the purist engineering implications of Peano Arithmetic
consist of its particular theorems, that can be encoded in such “ ΠQ
1 formats” ?
There is no space available in this article to adequately address these philosophical issues. Our
point is, however, that IQFS raises other issues besides besides this article’s main theme, that some
fragments of the historic aspirations of Hilbert and Gödel in ∗ and ∗∗ should be revisited.

8

Disentangling Some Confusing Interpretations of Theorem 6.7
and Its Corollaries that Could Otherwise Plausibly Arise

It was during one of the final stages of this paper, as its draft was nearing completion, that we
elected to add a very short further chapter into this article, “disentangling” some confusions that
might “otherwise plausibly arise” . It was desirable to insert a chapter into this article, whose title
contained the preceeding italicized words, so that the exact meaning of Theorem 6.7’s central result
could not be confused.
Theorem 6.7’s meaning is complicated by the fact10 that IQFS(P A+), as well as its several
predecessors in [50]-[59], were able to prove theorems, asserting their own consistency, only by
employing Example 3.5’s built-in “I am consistent” statements, as invoked axiomatic declarations.
This approach, which was centered around Item ⊕ from Example 3.5, will naturally cause many
readers to raise the following skeptical question:
# # # Is it not almost cheating when an axiom system verifies its own consistency
by using ⊕ ’s formalized “I am consistent” axiom as an intermediate step, to verify
its own consistency? After all, such a technique can verify its own consistency only
in a technically purely legalistic sense. (It is certainly, however, not meaningful in the
much broader almost philosophical respect, that Hilbert was grasping for in his famous
year-1900 Second Open Question.)
It will be necessary for us to introduce the formalisms of Definition 8.1 and Corollary 8.2, before
replying to # # # ’s query.
10

PA+ was defined in our articles to be the trivial extension of Peano Arithmetic that uses a language that
includes the six Grounding level functions, in addition to the usual addition and multiplication primitives.

27

Definition 8.1

Let β again denote an axiom system that uses LQ ’s language (whose

collection of function symbols include the six usual Grounding-level primitives plus θ’s special
indeterminately-defined function operation). Also, let IQFS(β) once again denote Definition 5.7’s
self-referencing formalism, that proves all of β ’s ΠQ
1 theorems and which additionally recognizes
its own formalized Hilbert consistency, via its use of an invoked “I am consistent” axiom. Then
β will be called Platonically Stable iff IQFS(β) is a consistent axiom system. ( Likewise, if
IQFS(β) is inconsistent then β will be called “Platonically Unstable”.)
Corrolary 8.2

Let us assume Conjecture 6.6 is correct (as we are almost 100 % certain it

is). Suppose β is an axiom system which is consistent with IQFS’s Group-0 and 1 axioms. Then β
is automatically “Platonically Stable” (e.g. the formalism IQFS(β) is consistent).
The formal statements of Theorem 6.7 and Corollary 8.2 are closely related. This is because
Corollary 8.2 applies Definition 8.1’s notion of “Platonic Stability” in essentially every place where
Theorem 6.7 had used Definition 5.2’s “Consistency Preserving” paradigm. Thus, there is no need
to formally prove Corollary 8.2 because it is almost a direct consequence of Theorem 6.7.
The nice aspect of Corollary 8.2 is its vocabulary will allow us to better frame a reply to # # # ’s
query. In particular, it would certainly be preferable (and more Utopian) if human beings could
muster more sophisticated justifications for their thought processes than had appeared in Example
3.5’s short 1-sentence axiom statement ⊕ (which simply declared “I am consistent”). However,
such a reply to # # # ’s query is unnecessary for the planet Earth’s high-IQ primates to gain
adequate confidence to justify their thought processes. All that is strictly necessary, from a purist
perspective, is for an advanced Thinking Being to find a robust formalism that satisfies Definition
8.1’s criteria of “Platonic Stability”. The significant aspect of our Corollary 8.2 is it shows adequate
forms of Platonic Stability are available to allow an introspective thinker to simultaneously:
1. presume its own consistency as a built-in assumption, and
2. rest assured this assumption will not spin its IQFS(β) formalism into a cycle of inconsistency.

Corollary 8.2’s notion of Platonic Stability, thus, partially reinforces Gödel’s philosophy of Mathematical Platonism, and it also helps make comprehensible the aspirations that motivated Hilbert’s
and Gödel’s famous statements ∗ and ∗∗. This perspective is useful when we remind ourselves that
the invariant + + , which Example 3.3 had attributed to the joint work of Pudlák, Solovay, Nelson
and Wilkie-Paris, [35, 39, 44, 49], established that self-justifying formalisms, much stronger than
IQFS(β), are simply impossible.
Remark 8.3 (Snapshot Perspective): Summarizing our last 25 years of research into one
short paragraph, it is certainly true that any proof that relies upon Example 3.5’s “I am consistent”
axiom is, in some respects, a quite skinny form of proof, that one is almost first tempted to ignore.
On the other hand, this perspective is actually quite useful because Corollary 8.2 does reminds us
that we do live in what Definition 8.1 had called a “ Platonically Stable” world.
28

9

Concluding Remarks

All our published articles about self-justifying arithmetics have emphasized that evasions of the
Second Incompleteness Effect rested on using arithmetics that were weaker than traditional arithmetics in, at least, some respects. (The Second Incompleteness Theorem’s significance in refuting
the original objectives of Hilbert’s Consistency Program is thus, simply, undeniable.) It would,
nevertheless, be of interest if some fragments of Hilbert’s and Gödel’s objectives, as announced in
their formal statements ∗ and ∗∗, were achieved.
It is in this context and also with knowledge about how the scope of the Second Incompleteness
Theorem has been enhanced in many respects during the last 35 years, that we hope our boundarycase exceptions to the Second Incompleteness paradigm shall be found to be useful.
This is not merely because it would be pleasantly reassuring to see achieved some select portions
of what early 20-th century articles had advocated. (For instance, Gödel’s preference [12, 22] for a
“Platonist” philosophy is partially reinforced by Corollary 8.2’s “Platonic Stability”.) Our results
are, also of interest because future computers will, perhaps, have their capacities enhanced, if they
can simulate a human’s gut instinctive faith in his own consistency.
Thus, it is in such respects that Theorem 6.7 and the related Propositions 4.3 and 7.1 will
help us better appreciate the aspirations that Hilbert and Gödel were pursuing in their formal
statements ∗ and ∗∗, as well as to formalize what limited aspects of their stated goals in ∗ and ∗∗
can actually be achieved.
It also should be mentioned that some special philosophical issues were raised by Remark 7.5
and in Remark 8.3’s observation that symbolic logic has a “Platonically Stable” structure.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS: I am grateful to Pavel Pudlák for sending me an email letter [41]
that suggested I investigate how to apply Ajtai’s study [3] of Pigeon-Hole effects to refine my prior
results about self-justifying logics. (The combination of Pudlák’s suggestion and our subsequent
distinguishing between the ζ and θ operators has led to the stipulated improvements upon
[55]’s ISCE formalism.) I also thank Bradley Armour-Garb and Seth Chaiken for several helpful
comments about how to improve this paper’s presentation. As was mentioned earlier, Sam Buss
should also be credited for partially influencing my research when, during a casual lunch at a 1977
meeting of the Kurt Gödel Society, he suggested I might look at the implications the Pigeon Hole
Principle had for my on-going research.

References
[1] Z. Adamowicz, “Herbrand consistency and bounded arithmetic”, Fundamenta Mathematicae 171 (2002)
pp. 279-292.
[2] Z. Adamowicz and P. Zbierski, “On Herbrand consistency in weak theories”, Archives for Mathematical
Logic 40(2001) 399-413
[3] M. Ajtai, “Complexity of the pigeon hole principle” Combinatorica 14:4 (1994), pp. 417-433.

29

[4] L. D. Beklemishev, “Iterated local reflection versus iterated consistency”, Annals of Pure and Applied
Logic 75 (1995) pp. 25-48.
[5] L. D. Beklemishev, “Induction rules, reflection principles and provably recursive functions”, Annals of
Pure and Applied Logic 85 (1997) pp. 193-242.
[6] L. D. Beklemishev, “Proof theoretic analysis by iterated reflection”, Archives on Mathematical Logic
42 (2003) pp. 515-552.
[7] A. Bezboruah and J. C. Shepherdson, “Gödel’s second incompleteness theorem for Q”, Journal of
Symbolic Logic 41 (1976) pp. 503-512
[8] G. Boolos, The Logic of Provability, Cambridge University Press 1993 (The passage on pages xxii-xxiii
is germane to Footnote 2.)
[9] S. R. Buss, Bounded Arithmetic, (Ph D Thesis) Proof Theory Notes #3, Bibliopolis 1986.
[10] S. R. Buss, Informal private conversations during a lunch in Vienna at the 5-th meeting of the Kurt
Gödel Colloquium, 1997.
[11] S. R. Buss and A. Ignjatovic, “Unprovability of consistency statements in fragments of bounded arithmetic”, Annals of Pure and Applied Logic 74 (1995) pp. 221-244.
[12] J. W. Dawson, Logical Dilemmas: The life and work of Kurt Gödel, AKPeters, 1997
[13] H. B Enderton, A Mathematical Introduction to Logic, Academic Press, 2001
[14] S. Feferman, “Arithmetization of mathematics in a general setting”, Fundamenta Mathematicae 49
(1960) pp. 35-92.
[15] M. Fitting, First Order Logic and Automated Theorem Proving, Springer-Verlag, 1996.
[16] H. M. Friedman, “On the consistency, completeness and correctness problems”, Ohio State Tech Report,
1979.
[17] H. M. Friedman, “Translatability and relative consistency”, Ohio State Tech Report, 1979.
[18] H. M. Friedman, “ Gödel’s blessing and Gödel’s curse”. (This is “Lecture 4” within a 5-part Ohio
State YouTube lecture, dated March 14, 2014, whose last few minutes is devoted to summarizing the
mysteries left unsolved by the Second Incompleteness Theorem,)
[19] G. Gentzen, “Die wiederpruchsfreiheit der zeinen zahlentheorie”, Mathematische Annalen 112 (936),
pp. 439-565.
[20] K. Gödel, “ Über formal unentscheidbare sätze der principia mathematica und verwandte systeme I”,
Monatshefte für Mathematik und Physik 37 (1931) pp. 349-360.
[21] K. Gödel, “The present situation in the foundations of mathematics”’, in Collected Works Volume III:
Unpublished Essays and Lectures, 2004, pp. 45–53, edited by S. Feferman, Oxford University Press.
[22] R. Goldstein, Incompleteness: The Proof and Paradox of Kurt Gödel, Norton Press, 2005.
[23] P. Hájek, “Mathematical fuzzy logic and natural numbers”, Fundamenta Mathematicae 81 (2007), pp.
155-163.
[24] P. Hájek, “Towards metamathematics of weak arithmetics over fuzzy logic”, Logic Journal of the IPL
19 (2011), pp. 467-475.
[25] P. Hájek and P. Pudlák, Metamathematics of First Order Arithmetic, Springer Verlag 1991.
[26] D. Hilbert, “ Über das unendliche”, Mathematische Annalen 95 (1926) pp. 161-191.
[27] D. Hilbert and P. Bernays, Grundlagen der Mathematic, Springer 1939.
[28] R. Jeroslow, “Consistency statements in mathematics ”, Fundamenta Math 72 (1971) pp.17-40.

30

[29] S. C. Kleene, “On the notation of ordinal numbers”, Journal of Symbolic Logic 3 (1938), 150-156.
[30] J. Krajı́cek, “A note on proofs of falsehood”, Archives on Math Logic 26 (1987) pp. 169-176.
[31] J. Krajı́cek, Bounded Propositional Logic and Complexity Theory, Cambridge University Press 1995.
[32] G. Kreisel and G. Takeuti, “Formally self-referential propositions for cut-free classical analysis”, Dissertationes Mathematicae 118 (1974).
[33] M. H. Löb, “A solution to a problem by Leon Henkin”, Journal of Symbolic Logic 20 (1955) 115-118.
[34] E. Mendelson, Introduction to Mathematical Logic, CRC Press, 2010.
[35] E. Nelson, Predicative Arithmetic, Mathematics Notes, Princeton University Press, 1986.
[36] R. Parikh, “Existence and feasibility in arithmetic”, Journal of Symbolic Logic 36 (1971), pp. 494-508
[37] J. B. Paris and C. Dimitracopoulos, “A note on undefinability of cuts”, Journal Symbolic Logic 48
(1983) 564-569
[38] C. Parsons, “On n−quantifier elimination”, Journal of Symbolic Logic 37 (1972), pp. 466-482.
[39] P. Pudlák, “Cuts, consistency statements and interpretations”, Journal of Symbolic Logic 50 (1985),
pp. 423-442
[40] P. Pudlák, “On the lengths of proofs of consistency”, in Collegium Logicum: 1996 Annals of the Kurt
Gödel Society ( Volume 2), Springer-Wien-NewYork, pp 65-86.
[41] P. Pudlák, Private emailed communications, 2001.
[42] H. A. Rogers, Theory of Recursive Functions and Effective Compatibility, McGrawHill 1967.
[43] R. Smullyan, First Order Logic, Springer-Verlag, 1968.
[44] R. M. Solovay, Private telephone conversation in 1994 describing Solovay’s generalization of one of
Pudlák’s theorems [39], using some methods of Nelson and Wilkie-Paris [35, 49]. (The Appendix A of
[51] offers a 4-page summary of this conversation.)
[45] V. Švejdar, ”An interpretation of Robinson arithmetic in its Grzegorczjk’s weaker variant” Fundamenta
Informaticae 81 (2007) pp. 347-354.
[46] G. Takeuti, Proof Theory, Studies in Logic Volume 81, North Holland, 1987.
[47] A. Turing, “On the computable numbers with an application to the entscheidungsproblem”, Proceedings
of London Mathematics Soceity, 1936, pp. 230-265.
[48] A. Visser, “Faith and falsity”, Annals of Pure and Applied Logic 131 (2005) pp. 103-131.
[49] A. J. Wilkie and J. B. Paris, “On the scheme of induction for bounded arithmetic”, Annals of Pure
and Applied Logic (35) 1987, 261-302.
[50] D. Willard, “Self-verifying axiom systems”, Computational Logic and Proof Theory: The Third Kurt
Gödel Colloquium (1993), Springer-Verlag LNCS#713, 325-336.
[51] D. Willard, “Self-verifying systems, the incompleteness theorem and the tangibiltiy reflection principle”,
in Journal of Symbolic Logic 66 (2001) pp. 536-596.
[52] D. Willard, “How to extend the semantic tableaux and cut-free versions of the second incompleteness
theorem almost to robinson’s arithmetic Q”, Journal of Symbolic Logic 67 (2002) pp. 465–496.
[53] D. Willard, “A version of the second incompleteness theorem for axiom systems that recognize addition
but not multiplication as a total function”, First Order Logic Revisited, Logos Verlag, pp. 337–368.
[54] D. Willard, “An exploration of the partial respects in which an axiom system recognizing solely addition
as a total function can verify its own consistency”, Journal of Symbolic Logic 70 (2005) pp. 1171-1209.
[55] D. Willard, “A generalization of the second incompleteness theorem and some exceptions to it”. Annals
of Pure and Applied Logic 141 (2006) pp. 472-496.

31

[56] D. Willard, “On the available partial respects in which an axiomatization for real valued arithmetic
can recognize its consistency”, Journal of Symbolic Logic 71 (2006) pp. 1189-1199.
[57] D. Willard, “Passive induction and a solution to a Paris-Wilkie question”, Annals of Pure and Applied
Logic 146(2007) pp. 124-149.
[58] D. Willard, “Some specially formulated axiomizations for IΣ0 manage to evade the herbrandized version
of the second incompleteness theorem”, Information and Computation 207 (2009), pp. 1078-1093.
[59] D. Willard, “On the broader epistemological significance of self-justiying axiom systems”, Proceedings
of 21st Wollic Conference, Springer Verlag LNCS 8652 (2014), pp. 221-236.
[60] C. Wrathall, “Rudimentary Predicates and Relative Computation”, Siam Journal on Computing 7
(1978), pp 194-209.
[61] P. Yourgrau, A World Without Time: The Forgotten Legacy of Gödel and Einstein, Basic Books, 2005.
(See page 58 for the passages we have quoted.)

Appendix Justifying Conjecture 6.6
This appendix should be read only after Section 6 has been finished. It will have two purposes.
They will be to:
1. Outline an approximate intuitive justification for Conjecture 6.6’s validity.
2. Explore this conjecture’s broader significance.

A.1

An Approximate Intuitive Sketch Justifying Conjecture 6.6

The underlying intuition supporting Conjecture 6.6 is easy to summarize. It stems from the fact that
θ is the only growth-permitting function (or primitive) in LQ ’s language. Moreover, the definitions
Q
of ΠQ
1 and Σ1 sentences (in Item 5.4) forbid θ’s appearance anywhere in these sentences, outside of

the particular places where Definition 4.4’s Ej terms use the θ primitive as an intermediate device
for defining the quantity 2j .
These facts seem to obviously imply that a proof can construct integers n > 2 only by applying
the Up-Walking axioms, from Lines (14)–(17), in the directly canonical and cumbersome manner.
That is, a proof P appears to be able to verify the existence of an integer n ≥ 2d only after it has
isolated d + 1 distinct terms, which correspond to d + 1 distinctly different powers of 2.
Let Md denote a finite-sized model for the subset of Natural Numbers, all of which satisfy the
exact inequality of x < 2d . Also, let S denote the set of ΠQ
1 axiom sentences that were defined
by Part (B) of Conjecture 6.6. If d = ⌊ Log2 K ⌋ then Part (B) implies that all of the axioms in
S hold true within the model Md . However, its particular “Breaking Point” sentence Ψ does
become false in the model Md+1 , while all the other axioms of S continue to hold true within each
of the models of Md+1 , Md+2 , Md+3 , ... .
At an intuitive (somewhat informal) level, these facts suggest that the proof P , alluded to in
Line (28), can establish “0 = 1” only after it has first constructed more than 1 + ⌊ Log2 K ⌋ distinct
powers of 2. (This is because the sentence Ψ ultimately forces a contradiction, in such a context,
because of its “Size-K Breaking Point” property.).
32

Under our rules for encoding P (which requires six bits to encode each of P ’s 23 logical symbols),
such a lengthy sequence of d + 1 distinctly different terms will cause P to be so large that Log2 (P )
exceeds by at least a factor of 6 the size of Log2 (K). Indeed, the quantity 61 in Line (28)’s upper
bound is actually a conservative overestimate of the actual bounding quantity. But we will not
delve further into such a discussion, here, because this section was intended to provide only an
intuitive sketch justifying Conjecture 6.6.
A 1-sentence summary of the intuition behind Conjecture 6.6 is that its axiom system γ is so
weak that it cannot construct a required integer, larger than K, without engaging in a proof that
directly requires more than 6 · Log2 K bits.

A.2 More Details about Conjecture 6.6
Our IQFS(β) axiom system does not need an actual formal proof of Conjecture 6.6 for it to become
mathematically very significant. All it needs, from a strictly minimalistic perspective, is for the
Conjecture 6.6 to hold true under the Standard Model (even if its formal proof is independent from
the exact axioms of say Peano Arithmetic and/or ZF Set Theory).
A rigorous proof of Conjecture 6.6’s is, obviously, still desirable. This proof is likely to be
tedious and lengthy because the analog of Conjecture 6.6’s inequality (28) is, simply, not true when
IQFS’s Group-zero axiom replaces our new θ function operation with the Successor primitive.
In particular, the Pudlák-Solovay Assertion ++, from Example 3.3-a, was able to generalize the
Second Incompleteness Theorem, only by using the fact that analogs of Conjecture 6.6 are false
when Successor replaces θ.
The intuitive reason that θ operates so differently from Successor is that these two operations
differ in the following three significant respects:
1. Integers grow at a monotonically uniform rate under the successor operation, while any finite
sequence θ(2), θ( θ(2)) , θ( θ( θ(2))) ... θ k (2) is allowed to be monotonically decreasing under
the θ primitive.
2. The θ primitive satisfies Definition 3.6’s property of being a “Q-function” with ℵ1 different possible solution vectors, while there is only one unique representation of the successor
function.
3. The Π1 encodings for axioms about the 3-way arithmetic predicates Add(x, y, z) and M ult(x, y, z),
such as the associative rules for addition and multiplication, help one characterize the implications of the Successor function. But these rules are fully irrelevant to θ’s behavior.
Thus, Items 1-3 make us essentially 100 % confident that the θ and Successor primitives shall differ
sufficiently for Conjecture 6.6 to apply to the former primitive, although certainly not also to its
counterpart under the Successor operation.

33

