Some New Exceptions for the Semantic Tableaux
Version of the Second Incompleteness Theorem
Dan E. Willard ?
SpringerVerlag LNCS # 2381, pp. 281-297 Tableaux-2002 Proceedings

Abstract. This article continues our study of axiom systems that can
verify their own consistency and prove all Peano Arithmetic’s Π1 theorems. We will develop some new types of exceptions for the Semantic
Tableaux Version of the Second Incompleteness Theorem.

1

Introduction

Gödel’s Second Incompleteness Theorem states that sufficiently strong axiom
systems are unable to formally verify their own consistency. Let us define an
axiom system α to be Self-Justifying iff
i) one of α’s theorems will assert α ’s consistency (using some reasonable definition of consistency),
ii) and the axiom system α is in fact consistent.
It is well known [5, 6, 14] that Kleene’s Fixed Point Theorem implies every r.e.
axiom system α can be easily extended into a broader system α∗ which satisfies
condition (i). Kleene’s proposal [6] was essentially for the system α∗ to contain
all α’s axioms plus the one added axiom sentence below.
+

There exists no proof of 0=1 from the union of α with “this sentence”.

Kleene noted that it was easy to apply the Fixed Point Theorem to formally
encode a self-referencing statement, similar to the sentence above. The catch is
that α∗ can be inconsistent even while its added axiom formally asserts α∗ ’s
consistency. For this reason, Kleene, Rogers and Jeroslow [5, 6, 14] each emphatically warned their readers that most axiom systems similar to α∗ were useless on
account of their inconsistency, although they were technically well-defined. This
problem arises in both Gödel’s paradigm (where α extends Peano Arithmetic),
as well in many more general settings [1, 2, 4, 12, 16, 19, 25], where a Gödel-like
diagnoalization argument can be constructed to show that the very presence of
the axiom + causes the system α∗ to become inconsistent.
We have recently published four articles [20, 23–25] about generalizations of
the Second Incompleteness Theorem and exceptions to it that exist for Semantic Tableaux deductive calculi. Let A(x, y, z) and M (x, y, z) denote x + y = z
and x ∗ y = z , and let us say an axiom system α recognizes Addition and
?

Supported by NSF Grant CCR 99-02726. Email = dew@cs.albany.edu.

Multiplication as Total Functions iff it can prove ∀x∀y∃z A(x, y, z) and
∀x∀y∃z M (x, y, z) . We showed in [23, 25] that all axiom systems recognizing
Addition and Multiplication as total functions and containing one additional
Π1 axiom, called “V”, are unable to recognize their self–consistency, under the
paradigm of the Semantic Tableaux Deductive Calculi. On the other hand, our
papers [20, 24] did show that systems can verify some forms of their Tableaux
self-consistency while retaining an ability to prove at least analogs of Peano
Arithmetic’s Π1 theorems, if they treat Addition as a total function and Multiplication as a “non-total” 3-way relation M (x, y, z).
Our objective in this paper will be to establish crisper and stronger versions
of the preceding results. This topic is mathematically complex because there
are several plausible definitions D1 , D2 , D3 , ... indicating that an axiom
system α can verify its “Semantic Tableaux Consistency”. These definitions
are equivalent to each other under strong logics, but a weak axiom system α
is typically unable to prove these definitions of consistency are equivalent to
each other. Thus, the question naturally arises as to which definition of self–
justification is one choosing to study ?
In general, it is desirable to use the weakest possible definition among the
alternatives D1 , D2 , D3 , ... when one is seeking to generalize the Second
Incompleteness Theorem. On the other hand, the opposite is true when one seeks
to develop “boundary–case exceptions” to the Second Incompleteness Theorem
that introduce some new type of “Self–Justifying formalism”. They become more
wide–reaching when they use the strongest feasible Di available.
A system α ’s weakest possible definition of Tableaux–Self–Justification is
that α can prove the non–existence of a Smullyan–like Semantic Tableaux proof
p of the theorem 0 = 1 , in a context where p’s proper axioms are drawn
from the system α (itself). This was the formal definition of Self-Justification
we used in our Tableaux–2000 conference paper [23], as well as in [25]. The
preceding paragraph explained why weaker definitions of Self–Justification are
better, when developing generalizations of the Second Incompleteness Theorem.
Thus, we need not further improve the results from our prior generalizations [23,
25] of the Second Incompleteness Theorem because there is little room available
for further improvement, at least in the context of axioms systems that extend
Q+V and recognize the consistency of their Semantic Tableaux deductive calculi.
On the other hand, there are substantial open questions remaining about
whether and how far our exceptions to the Second Incompleteness Theorem,
involving for example the “IS(A)” formalism of [20, 24], can indeed be further
improved. The reason the latter topic is much more open than the former is that
weaker is certainly not better than stronger for it. This is because one would
ideally like the boundary–case exceptions to the Second Incompleteness Theorem to use the the strongest possible definition of Self–Justification, among the
available alternatives D1 , D2 , D3 , ... .
For example, our IS(A) system of [20, 24] could recognize the non–existence
of any Smullyan–like Tableaux proof p of the theorem 0 = 1 , all of whose
proper axioms are drawn from IS(A). However for fully arbitrary sentence Ψ ,

IS(A) was not able to prove the unavailability of two Smullyan–like Tableaux
contradictory proofs for Ψ and ¬ Ψ from IS(A).
Essentially, this paper will seek to investigate how close we can come to
establishing the above effect for extensions of IS(A). The next section will define
the notion of a “ Π1− ” sentence that will help clarify this issue. Section 1.2
will then define a new axiom system, called IS-1(A), that recognizes that no
pair of contradictory Semantic Tableaux proofs of the two sentences Ψ and
¬ Ψ from IS-1(A) can exist, whenever Ψ is a “ Π1− ” sentence. The Remark
5 (at the end of Section 1.2) will give a short 1-paragraph summary of a recent
discovery by us, showing that the preceding boundary–case exceptions to the
Second Incompleteness Theorem do not generalize from Π1− to Π2− sentences.
1.1. Notation and Statement of Main Theorem:
Some added notation is needed before we can state our main theorems. Say
a function F (a1 , a2 , ...aj ) satisfies the Non-Growth property iff F satisfies
F (a1 , a2 , ...aj ) ≤ M aximum(a1 , a2 , ...aj ) for all values of a1 , a2 , ...aj . Seven examples of non-growth functions are Integer Subtraction (where x − y is defined
to equal zero when x ≤ y ), Integer Division (where x ÷ y is defined to equal
x when y = 0 , and we round down to the nearest integer), M aximum(x, y),
Logarithm(x), P redecessor(x) = Max( x − 1 , 0 ), Root(x, y) = d x1/y e and
Count(x, j) designating the number of “1” bits among x’s rightmost j bits.
These functions are called the Grounding Functions.
We will use a slight variant of Logic’s conventional notation when discussing
grounding functions. A term will be defined to be a constant, variable or function
symbol (whose input arguments are recursively defined terms). If t is a term then
the quantifiers in the wffs ∀ v ≤ t Ψ (v) and ∃ v ≤ t Ψ (v) are called bounded
quantifiers. If Φ is a formula that uses the Grounding primitives as its function
symbols and the two relation symbols of “ = ” and “ ≤ ”, then this formula
will be called both “ Π0− ” and “ Σ0− ” whenever all its quantifiers are bounded.
For n ≥ 1 , a formula Υ shall be called “ Πn− ” iff it is written in the form
−
∀v1 ∀v2 ... ∀vk Φ, where Φ is “ Σn−1
”. Likewise, Υ is called “ Σn− ” iff it is
−
written in the form ∃v1 ∃v2 ... ∃vk Φ, where Φ is “ Πn−1
”.
−
−
Our definitions of Σn and Πn formulae are the same as the conventional
definitions of Σn and Πn formulae, except that the Addition and Multiplication
function symbols are replaced with Grounding primitives. Since Subtraction and
Division can represent Addition and Multiplication as relations, every conventional Π1 formula can be translated into an Π1− formula that is equivalent to it
under sufficiently strong models of Arithmetic.
Using the preceding notation, we can provide a more succinct summary of
our main result. Let us say an axiom system α has a Level-N understanding of
its own Semantic Tableaux consistency iff it can recognize that there exists no
Smullyan-like Semantic Tableaux proofs, using α’s proper axioms, of both the
−
theorems Ψ and ¬ Ψ , for all ΠN
sentences Ψ . Let us say α has a primitive
understanding of its own Semantic Tableaux consistency iff it can recognize that
there exists no Smullyan-like Semantic Tableaux proof, using α’s proper axioms,

of the theorem 0 = 1 . Our prior IS(A) system of [20, 24] technically had only
a primitive understanding of its own Semantic Tableaux consistency. However,
we could have easily improved this result to the Level-Zero. In this paper, we
will show how a stronger version of IS(A), called IS-1(A), can have a Level-1
understanding of its own Semantic Tableaux consistency. This is a non–trivial
improvement over our prior result because there exists no decision procedure for
enumerating all true Π1− sentences.
1.2 Definition of IS-1(A):
Let A denote an axiom system that proves theorems about the Grounding
Functions. Our new axiom system, called IS-1(A), will be a 4-part self-justifying
axiom system. Its Group-Zero, 1 and 2 axiom schemes will be defined analogously to their counterparts in the IS(A) formalism of [20, 24] (except for some
unimportant notational changes). However IS-1(A)’s Group-3 scheme will have
a quite different definition than IS(A)’s counterpart. It will essentially assert
that the IS-1(A) formalism is Level-1 consistent. The formal 4-part defintion of
IS-1(A) is given below:
Group-Zero: Two of the Group-zero axioms will define two initial constants
that correspond to the integers 0 and 1. The third Group-zero axiom will
indicate that Addition is a total function. (It will thus provide a means to
define integers larger than 1.) Since our Grounding Function formalism does
not technically use an Addition function symbol, the axiom (1) below will
view Addition as an operation that is the inverse of Subtraction:
∀x ∀y ∃z

x = z −y

(1)

Group-1: This axiom group will consist of a finite set of Π1− sentences, denoted as F , which assures that the seven Grounding functions have their
conventional properties with regards to the “=” and “<” predicates when
they are given constants as inputs. By this we mean that for each grounding
function G , k-tuple (n1 , n2 , ...nk ) and added constant m , the union of
axiom system F with (1)’s added axiom will be sufficient to prove whichever
one of the three conditions of G(n1 , n2 , ...nk ) = m, G(n1 , n2 , ...nk ) < m
or G(n1 , n2 , ...nk ) > m is true. (Any finite set of Π1− sentences F with
this property may be used to define Group-1. Our prior published papers
expressed no strong preference about which F was employed.)
−
Group-2: Let PrfΦ
A (x, y) denote a Σ0 formula indicating that y is a proof of
the theorem Φ from the axiom system A . For each Π1− sentence Φ, the
Group-2 schema will contain an axiom of the form (2). Thus, the Group-2
scheme shall trivially endow IS-1(A) with a capacity to verify all A’s Π1−
theorems.
∀ y { Prf Φ
(2)
A ( y ) ⊃ Φ }
Group-3: This group will consist of one Π1− sentence stating essentially:

∗ There exists no two Semantic Tableaux proofs from the Union of
the Group-1 and 2 axioms with this sentence looking at itself of
both some Π1− sentence and its negation.
In order to formally encode ∗ as a Π1− sentence, let Pair(x, y) denote a
Σ0− formula indicating x is the Gödel number of a Π1− sentence and y is
x ’s negation. Also, let Prf IS-1(A) (a, b) denote a Σ0− formula that indicates
that b is the Gödel number of a semantic tableaux proof of the theorem a
from the axiom system IS-1(A). In this context, the formal Gödel encoding
of the axiom sentence ∗ can be approximated as:
∀x∀y∀p∀q

¬ [ Pair(x, y) ∧ Prf IS-1(A) (x, p) ∧ Prf IS-1(A) (y, q) ] (3)

Remark 1. The full formal description of IS-1(A)’s Group-3 axiom is somewhat more complicated than the abbreviated descriptions of this axiom’s structure, given either by the Sentence ∗ or by the analogous Equation (3). The main
added complication arises because the Group-3 axiom declares the consistency
of a formal set of axioms that includes “itself” (in the words of Sentence ∗. )
The general notion of an axiom including formally “itself” when it refers to the
consistency of an axiom schema goes back to Kleene’s 1938 paper [6] (as the first
paragraph of this article had already indicated). Kleene’s abbreviated description is insufficient to establish that Equation (3) can be encoded precisely as a
Π1− sentence. To do this, one needs techniques similar to Appendixes B through
D from our article [24]. We will not repeat such a construction here.
Remark 2. One can easily become initially confused by IS-1(A)’s Group-3
axiom because IS-1(A) is not automatically consistent by virtue of the simple
fact that its Group-3 axiom declares: “I am consistent”. Using the nomenclature
from the opening paragraph of our article, the difficulty is that it is plausible
that IS-1(A) could satisfy Part–i but not the equally important Part-ii of the
definition of Self–Justification (as had happened with the example of α∗ , in the
first paragraph of this article). The next chapter will prove that this difficulty
does not occur with IS-1(A).
Remark 3. We wish to reinforce the point made by the preceding paragraph,
and graphically illustrate how some seemingly minor modifications in IS-1(A)’s
formalism will result in the construction of an inconsistent system. Pudlák has
proven that no consistent extension α of Robinson’s axiom system Q can prove
that all Hilbert-styled proofs employing α’s axioms are assured to be free of inconsistencies. Solovay subsequently observed [16] it was possible to use methods
of Nelson and Wilkie-Paris [9, 19] to incrementally refine this particular theorem
of Pudlák’s so that it will generalize for essentially all axiom systems that simultaneously recognize Successor as a total function and that retain a capacity to
prove all Peano Arithmetic’s Π1− theorems. Hence, IS-1(A) will automatically
become inconsistent if its Group-3 axiom is simply revised so that “Prf” specifies
a Hilbert rather than Semantic Tableaux variant of proof.
Remark 4. Similarly, our “Q+V” version of the Second Incompleteness
Theorem from [23, 25] demonstrates that it is infeasible to modify the IS-1(A)
axiom system so that it can simultaneously recognize Multiplication as a total

function and retain a logically valid analog of Equation (3)’s Group-3 axiom.
There is insufficient space to explain here why Multiplication’s totality is central
for effectuating the Semantic Tableaux version of the Second Incompleteness
Theorem. However, the reader can find some very good and detailed intuitive
explanations for this phenomena in either the passage spanning pages 328–331
in our article [20] or in Remark 4.5 of [24].
Remark 5. During the last three months while this article was being refereed, we developed a new version of the Second Incompleteness Theorem which
states that there exists a Π1− sentence W , provable from the IΣ0 fragment of
Peano Arithmetic, such that no consistent axiom system α can prove W ,
prove Addition is a total function and simultaneously recognize its own Level2 Semantic Tableaux consistency. There is no space to insert the proof of this
added theorem here, and we will display it elsewhere. It implies that when A
has the strength of Peano Arithmetic, it is impossible to devise a modification of
IS-1(A) that is consistent and whose Group-3 axiom precludes the possibility of
there existing simultaneous Semantic Tableaux proofs of both an arbitrary Π2−
sentence and its negation. This inability to generalize our results from Level-1
to Level-2 consistency makes the main theorem-proofs, presented in the next
chapter, even the more interesting.
Remark 6. Let us say that a formula Υ (v) is an Initialization Segment
relative to an axiom system α if α can formally prove:
Υ (0) and ∀v { Υ (v) ⊃ Υ (v + 1) }

(4)

Kriesel-Takeuti, Nelson, Pudlák, Visser and Wilkie-Paris [4, 8, 9, 12, 18, 19] have
illustrated several examples of Initialization-Formulae Υ (v), where an axiom
system α can prove its Semantic Tableaux consistency local to such Initialization
Segments. Thus if “ BadTableaux α (y) ” denotes that y is a semantic tableaux
proof of the theorem 0=1 from α, then there are several known axiom systems
α that can prove localized consistency statements similar to:
∀y

{ Υ (y)

⊃

¬ BadTableaux α ( y ) }

(5)

The earliest version of (5) was discovered by Kriesel-Takeuti [8] in the rather
specialized context of a Second Order Logic generalization of the Cut-Free Sequent Calculus. Nelson [9] showed that Robinson’s Arithmetic Q can prove a
version of Equation (5) about itself. Pudlák [4, 12] proved a much more general theorem showing a similar effect was applicable to any finitely axiomatized
sequential theory (and also allowing for Wilkie-Paris’s notion [19] of a Herbrandrestricted-consistency). This literature is not exactly relevant to Self-Justifying
axiom systems, because our axiom systems do not have their consistency statements localized by an analog of Equation (5)’s formula Υ (y) . However, this
literature is probably the closest analog to our results that has been explored
by other researchers. We especially encourage the readers to examine Pudlák’s
work [4, 12] because it proves Equation (5)’s effect generalizes for all finitely
axiomatized sequential theories, which is a quite noteworthy phenomena !

2

Proof of Main Theorem

Let I( • ) denote a function that maps an initial axiom system A onto a second
axiom system, denoted as I(A) . Let us call the mapping–formalism I( • )
Consistency-Preserving iff I(A) is consistent whenever the union of the axiom
system A with Section 1.2’s Group-Zero and Group-1 axiom schemes is consistent. Our objective will be to prove that IS-1( • ) is “Consistency-Preserving”.
In our discussion, a sentence Ψ will be called PRENEX∗ iff it is written in the
form Q1 x1 Q2 x2 ... Qn xn θ(x1 , x2 ...xn ) where θ(x1 , x2 ...xn ) is a Σ0− formula
and Qi denotes either the symbol ∀ or ∃.
Our definition of a semantic tableaux proof will be very similar to the definitions used in say Fitting’s or Smullyan’s textbooks [3, 15]. Define a Φ-Based
Candidate Tree for the axiom system α to be a tree structure whose root corresponds to the sentence ¬ Φ rewritten in PRENEX∗ normal form and whose
all other nodes are either axioms of α or deductions from higher nodes of the
tree. Let the notation “ A =⇒ B ” indicate that B is a valid deduction when
A is an ancestor of B in the candidate tree T . In this notation, the deduction
rules allowed in a candidate tree are:
1. Υ ∧ Γ =⇒ Υ and Υ ∧ Γ =⇒ Γ .
2. ¬ ¬ Υ =⇒ Υ . Other valid Tableaux rules for the “ ¬ ” symbol include:
¬(Υ ∨Γ ) =⇒ ¬Υ ∧¬Γ , ¬(Υ ⊃ Γ ) =⇒ Υ ∧¬Γ , ¬(Υ ∧Γ ) =⇒ ¬Υ ∨¬Γ ,
¬ ∃v Υ (v) =⇒ ∀v¬ Υ (v) and ¬ ∀v Υ (v) =⇒ ∃v ¬Υ (v)
3. A pair of sibling nodes Υ and Γ is allowed in a candidate tree when their
ancestor is Υ ∨ Γ .
4. A pair of sibling nodes ¬Υ and Γ is allowed in a candidate tree when
their ancestor is Υ ⊃ Γ .
5. ∃v Υ (v) =⇒ Υ (u) where u denotes a newly introduced “Parameter
Symbol”.
6. ∀v Υ (v) =⇒ Υ (t) where t denotes a parameter term. The “Parameter
Terms” here are built out of the Grounding Functions, whose inputs are any
set of constant symbols c1 , c2 , .., cm and parameter symbols u1 , u2 , .., un ,
where each symbol ui was previously introduced by an ancestor of the
node storing the new deduction “ Υ (t) ”.
Define a particular leaf-to-root branch in a candidate tree T to be Closed iff it
contains both some sentence Υ and its negation ¬ Υ . A Semantic Tableaux
proof of Φ is defined to be a candidate tree whose root stores the sentence ¬Φ
(written in PRENEX∗ normal form) and all of whose root-to-leaf branches are
closed. The only distinction between our definition of a semantic tableaux proof
and some other conventional definitions in [3, 15, 19] is that we require Φ’s proof
tree to have its root store ¬ Φ rewritten in PRENEX∗ normal form, whereas
some other conventional definitions do not have the PRENEX∗ requirement. All
our theorems will also hold if we drop the PRENEX∗ requirement, but the notation in our main proofs will be greatly simplified if we begin with the assumption
that the root has been normalized into PRENEX∗ form.

Let T denote a Φ-Based Candidate Tree, β denote a branch of T , L and
M denote two fixed constants, and VAL( • ) denote a function that maps each
term s (from β ) onto an integer VAL(s), subject to the following constraints:
A. Suppose u represents a new parameter symbol that is introduced at a depth
level d along the branch β . Then its value will satisfy the constraint:
Val(u) ≤ Min( M , L · 2d )

(6)

B. VAL( cK ) = K when cK corresponds to one of the two particular
constants, c0 or c1 , defined by IS-1(A)’s Group-zero axiom and representing
the two numbers of zero and one.
C. VAL( s )’s definition will generalize in the natural manner for terms s that
contain function symbols F , i.e. VAL(F (s1 , s2 )) = F (VAL(s1 ),VAL(s2 ) ).
Our next definition will require the added notation convention listed below.
Let Ψ M denote a sentence identical to Ψ except that all the previouslyunrestricted universal quantifiers will have their ranges redefined in Ψ M
to correspond to the subset of non-negative integers ≤ M . (Bounded
universal quantifiers and both bounded and unbounded existential quantifiers in Ψ will not have their ranges changed under Ψ M . )
Our next definition will use the fact that a Φ-Based Candidate Tree IS NOT
a Semantic Tableaux proof of Φ when at least one of the branches of this tree
fails to be closed. Let us say a branch β of such a Φ-Based Candidate Tree is
Conservative iff there exists an ordered triple (L, M,VAL) where β satisfies
the preceding conditions A–C, plus the following additional fourth constraint
below. (We will also call such a branch (L,M)–Conservative in the special
case where the particular values for (L, M ) are fixed and known in advance.)
D. All sentences Ψ appearing on the branch β will be sentences where Ψ M is
valid in the Standard Model of the Natural Numbers.
Before proceeding further, it would be useful to explain the significance of
Conservative Branches. Lemma 1 will state that no “candidate tree” can be a
“semantic tableaux proof” when it draws its proper axioms from IS-1(A) and
simultaneously contains a Conservative Branch. This fact will enable us to develop a formal proof–by–contradiction that the IS-1( • ) axiom mapping must be
Consistency-Preserving, because otherwise the algorithm PROBE (which shall
defined be in Section 2.2) will construct the particular type of Conservative
Branch, whose existence will be strictly forbidden by Lemma 1.
Lemma 1. . Let α denote an axiom system whose every axiom sentence is
written in PRENEX∗ normal form (similar to IS-1( A ) ). Then none of candidate trees drawing their proper axioms from α can simultaneously contain a
Conservative Branch and constitute a “semantic tableaux proof ”.

Proof. Very trivial because all α’s axioms, as well as any sentence stored in a
proof-tree’s root, are written in PRENEX∗ form. In such a context, it is simply
impossible for a branch β in a proof tree p to be closed without β containing both
some Σ0 sentence Υ and its negation ¬ Υ . The latter cannot possibly occur
in a Conservative branch, because Part-D of our definition of conservativeness
would then require that Υ and its negation ¬ Υ both be simultaneously valid
sentences in the Standard Model of the Natural Numbers. 2
We will now explain roughly how we will use Lemma 1 to devise a proof–
by–contradiction that verifies that the IS-1( • ) axiom mapping is Consistency–
Preserving. Let ω(x, y, p, q) be the Σ0− formula that corresponds to the square
bracket expression on the right-side of Equation (3). This means that IS-1( A ) ’s
Group-3 axiom (defined by Equation (3)) can be simply rewritten as:
∀x∀y∀p∀q

¬ ω(x, y, p, q)

(7)

For any second formula θ(x, y, p, q) , let us examine the properties of the following second sentence:
∀x∀y∀p∀q

{ ω(x, y, p, q) ⊃ θ(x, y, p, q) }

(8)

Let us call Equation (8) a Vacuous Truth iff it satisfies the following conditions:
a. Equation (8) is a logically valid statement.
b. Although it is a valid sentence, Equation (8) will actually not indicate what
it may first appear to imply. This is because no tuple (x, y, p, q) will actually
satisfy either ω(x, y, p, q) or θ(x, y, p, q).
It is well known that “vacuous truths” are often useful intermediate steps appearing in proofs-by-contradiction. For example, a proof-by-contradiction can
verify Equation (7)’s assertion by employing Equation (8)’s “vacuous truth”
and showing that no tuple (x, y, p, q) can satisfy θ(x, y, p, q) .
Our formal proof of IS-1( • )’s Consistency–Preserving property will rest on
a proof–by-contradiction of this type. Its invoked formal constraint sentence
“ ∀x∀y∀p∀q ¬ θ(x, y, p, q) ” will turn out to be a fairly simple consequence of
Lemma 1. Our objective will be to use this θ−statement and (8) to establish
(7). The only moderately difficult part of our proof will be because the full
meaning of vacuous truths are always awkward to directly visualize, because
of the inherently non–constructive nature of their statements. However, it will
be ultimately easy to follow our proof, provided one remembers the inherently
non–constructive nature of vacuous truths.
2.1 Structure of Main Proof
We begin by listing some notation that our proof will require:
1. Max(p, q) will denote the maximum of the two numbers p and q.

2. Top(P, Q) will be an abbreviation for the following formula:
∀p ∀q ∀x ∀y

{ Max(p, q) < Max(P, Q) ⊃ ¬ ω(x, y, p, q) }

(9)

3. Check(X, Y, P, Q) will denote a Boolean formula. In particular, let us recall
that the condition ω(X, Y, P, Q) indicates P is a proof from the axiom
system IS-1(A) of a Π1− sentence, called X , and Q is the proof of the
negation of this sentence, called Y . In order to simplify our notation, let
us assume that X denotes the sentence “ ∀a φ(a) ” and Y denotes
“ ∃a ¬ φ(a) ”. Then the symbol Check(X, Y, P, Q) will yield a Boolean
value of TRUE if and only if the following statement is valid in the Standard
Model of the Natural Numbers:
∀a

[a≤

1
· Max(P, Q) ]
2

⊃

φ(a)

(10)

4. Constraint(t, β) is a formula indicating that t denotes the Gödel number
of a Semantic Tableaux “Candidate Tree” and β is a conservative branch
in t . (Note that Lemma 1 indicates that when Constraint(t, β) is satisfied,
t CANNOT possibly represent a semantic tableaux proof. This fact will
be used by our proofs–by–contradiction to justify Theorems 1 and 2.)
We will now use the preceding notation to outline the structure of the proof
of our main theorem, asserting the consistency of the IS-1(A) formalism. Our
proof can be viewed as having two parts. One part (appearing in Section 2.2) will
establish the validity of the two statements (11) and (12), listed at the bottom
of this paragraph. Both these statements are vacuous truths, characterized by
the usual property that there exists no tuple (X, Y, P, Q) satisfying the squarebracket condition on the left side of their horn clause. As a result of their vacuous
nature, some readers may have difficulty fully visualizing the meaning of (11) and
(12), until Section 2.2’s proof for them is examined. We suggest that the readers
not feel particularly concerned to decipher their exact meaning at this current
juncture. Rather, one should just treat (11) and (12) as simply purely formal
mathematical objects. Our present goal will be to show how our main theorem,
asserting the consistency of the IS-1(A) formalism, follows easily from these
statements, when one uses a method of proof–by–contradiction. In conjunction
with our formal proofs of (11) and (12), given later in Section 2.2, this analysis
will establish that the IS-1(A) axiom system is, indeed, consistent.
∀X ∀Y ∀P ∀Q { [ Check(X, Y, P, Q) ∧ ω(X, Y, P, Q) ∧ Top(P, Q) ]
⊃ ∃ β Constraint(Q, β) }

(11)

∀X ∀Y ∀P ∀Q { [ ¬Check(X, Y, P, Q) ∧ ω(X, Y, P, Q) ∧ Top(P, Q) ]
⊃ ∃ β Constraint(P, β) }

(12)

We need one preliminary proposition before we can prove our main result.

Theorem 1. The combination of Equations (11) and (12) immediately imply
the validity of the following statement:
∀X ∀Y ∀P ∀Q { Top(P, Q) ⊃ ¬ ω(X, Y, P, Q) }

(13)

Proof. Our proof rests on separately examining the two cases where the tuple
(X, Y, P, Q) does and does not satisfy the condition Check(X, Y, P, Q).
In the first case, we can infer from Equation (11) that the formal predicate
condition “ ω(X, Y, P, Q) ∧ Top(P, Q) ” does imply the validity of
∃ β Constraint(Q, β) .

(14)

However, Lemma 1’s formal statement, translated into our new notation, amounts
to the assertion that it is impossible for Equation (14) and ω(X, Y, P, Q) to be
simultaneously valid (see the footnote 1 for the formal details substantiating this
point). Hence, our forced conclusion is that if the condition Check(X, Y, P, Q) is
valid, then the identity “ Top(P, Q) ⊃ ¬ ω(X, Y, P, Q) ” must automatically
hold in this case.
We can use almost the identical technique to prove the validity of the identity
“ Top(P, Q) ⊃ ¬ ω(X, Y, P, Q) ” in the alternate case where the condition
Check(X, Y, P, Q) is false. The only difference is that the second case will use
Equation (12) rather than (11) to arrive at a similar proof–by–contradiction.
(In particular, its proof will be the same as the preceding case, except that our
counterpart of Equation (14)’s intermediate step will now be the observation
that β satisfies Constraint(P, β) .)
2
Theorem 2. Suppose the union of the axiom system A with Section 1.2’s
“Group-1” axiom schema is a consistent system. Then IS-1(A) is also a consistent axiom system. (In our formal nomenclature, this amounts to stating that
the axiom–mapping formalism IS-1( • ) is “consistency–preserving”.)
Proof. It is easy to derive Theorem 2 from Theorem 1 by using the method of
proof–by–contradiction. In particular, suppose that the theorem was false and
IS-1(A) was inconsistent. Using our notation convention, there would then exist
a tuple (x, y, p, q) satisfying ω(x, y, p, q) . From such a tuple (x, y, p, q) ,
we can certainly find a second such tuple (X, Y, P, Q) , that also satisfies
this ω−condition, but additionally possesses the minimal possible value for
MAX(P, Q) among all tuples satisfying ω(x, y, p, q) . In our notation, this means
that (X, Y, P, Q) will satisfy the following dual condition:
ω(X, Y, P, Q) ∧ Top(P, Q)
1

(15)

The basic reason for this inherent incompatibility is that the formula ω(X, Y, P, Q) ,
by definition, implies Q is a semantic tableaux proof of the theorem Y . In this context, the formula Constraint(Q, β) flatly contradicts the preceding statement, since
Lemma 1 indicates that the presence of Q’s “conservative branch” β demonstrates
that it is impossible for the “candidate” tree Q to be a formal tableaux-style proof.

However, the point is that Theorem 1 precludes the possibility that any tuple
could satisfy Equation (15) (because the latter blatantly contradicts the invariant
(13), established by Theorem 1). Hence, our proof–by–contradiction forces us
to conclude that the Theorem 2 must be valid, because otherwise the formal
statement of Theorem 1 would be contradicted. 2
The remainder of this chapter will justify the vacuous truths, from Equations
(11) and (12), so that our proofs for Theorem 1 and 2 shall be formally completed.
2.2 Proofs of Equations (11) and (12)
To prove Equations (11) and (12), we need to first introduce some notation. Let
T denote a candidate tree, and (L, M ) denote the parameters used to define
an (L, M )−Conservative Branch. The symbol PROBE will denote an algorithm
which given these inputs, seeks to construct a valuation VAL( • ) and a
(L, M )−Conservative Branch for T , called Beta(T, L, M ). The four algorithmic
rules for constructing Beta(T, L, M ) and VAL( • ) are listed below:
1. The top node along the path Beta(T, L, M ) will always be T ’s root.
2. Suppose the first i nodes along the path Beta(T, L, M ) are N1 , N2 , N3 , ... Ni ,
and the node has Ni has two children denoted as Na and Nb . In
this case, the candidate tree T has used either the ∨ −Elimination or
⊃ −Elimination to justify this binary split, and we will let Ψa and Ψb
denote the two sentences stored in these two nodes. In this case, our algorithm PROBE(T, L, M ) will make the “left child” Na constitute the next
element along Beta(T, L, M )’s path when the sentence ΨaM is valid (in the
Standard Model of the Natural Numbers). Otherwise, it will make Nb be
Beta(T, L, M )’s next node.
3. If the first i nodes along the Beta(T, L, M )’s path are N1 , N2 , N3 , ... Ni and
Ni has only one child, denoted as Ni+1 , then the algorithm PROBE(T, L, M )
will “attempt” to make Ni+1 the next node along Beta(T, L, M )’s path.
This “attempt” may not be successful. The difficulty arises when Ni+1 ’s
sentence is constructed via the ∃−Elimination Rule (and it thus introduces a new parameter–symbol, called say uj ). In this case, the procedure
PROBE(T, L, M ) will attempt to assign VAL( uj ) the smallest possible
value (consistent with the assignments it previously gave to u1 , u2 , ... uj−1 ).
If the resulting quantity VAL( uj ) is sufficiently small to satisfy Equation
(6)’s inequality, then PROBE(T, L, M )’s attempt will be considered successful. Otherwise, the procedure PROBE(T, L, M ) will simply “quit” and cease
attempting to build T ’s (L, M )−conservative branch, called Beta(T, L, M ).
4. The procedure PROBE(T, L, M ) will iteratively repeat Steps 2 and 3 to make
the path Beta(T, L, M ) become longer and longer, until either it reaches the
candidate tree’s desired leaf–level or a failure occurs in Step 3.
Our next two lemmas will show how we may apply the procedure PROBE(T, L, M )
to corroborate the validity of Equations (11) and (12).

Lemma 2. . Suppose the union of the axiom system A with IS-1(A)’s Groupzero and Group-1 axioms is a consistent axiom system and that the 4-tuple
(X, Y, P, Q) satisfies the square-bracket expression on the left side of Equation
(11). (This expression is rewritten below.)
Check(X, Y, P, Q) ∧ ω(X, Y, P, Q) ∧ Top(P, Q)

(16)

Let us set L = 1 ,
M = 12 · Max(P, Q) − 1 and T = Q . Then for
these input values for (T, L, M ), the procedure PROBE will successfully find
an (L, M )−Conservative Branch lying in the candidate tree Q .
Lemma 3. . Let us again suppose that the union of the axiom system A with
IS-1(A)’s Group-zero and Group-1 axioms is a consistent axiom system. Also,
suppose that the (X, Y, P, Q) satisfies the square-bracket expression on the left
side of Equation (12). (This expression is rewritten below.)
( ¬ Check(X, Y, P, Q) ) ∧ ω(X, Y, P, Q) ∧ Top(P, Q)

(17)

Let us set L = 21 · Max(P, Q) , M = Max(P, Q) − 1 and T = P . Then
for these input values for (T, L, M ), the procedure PROBE will successfully find
an (L, M )−Conservative Branch lying in the candidate tree P .
PROOF OF LEMMA 2. We will use the Principle of Induction to prove
Lemma 2. Our inductive proof shall assume that the i highest nodes N1 , N2 ...Ni
along the path Beta(T,L,M) satisfy the (L, M )−Conservative condition, and it
will use this fact to deduce that the node Ni+1 will also be (L, M )−Conservative.
Our inductive proof will be divided into eight sub–cases because we must separately consider the possibilities that Ni+1 constitutes T ’s root, stores an axiom
of IS-1(A), or is deduced from a higher node of the candidate tree T via one
of the six Elimination rules for the ∃, ∀, ∧, ∨, ⊃ or ¬ symbols.
1. The Case where Ni+1 designates T ’s root: We will employ the
notation from Equation (10)’s definition of Check(X, Y, P, Q). It indicated that
if for some Σ0− formula φ(a) , X denotes the sentence “ ∀a φ(a) ” and Y
denotes “ ∃a ¬ φ(a) ”, then Check(X, Y, P, Q) denotes the statement:
∀a [a≤

1
· Max(P, Q) ] ⊃ φ(a)
2

(18)

In a context where Lemma 2 sets M = 12 · Max(P, Q) − 1 and [ ¬Y ] denotes
¬Y rewritten in Prenex∗ Normal form, Equation (18) implies that the sentence
[ ¬ Y ]M is valid. Moreover since Q represents a proof of the sentence Y ,
the root of Q’s proof tree is the sentence “ ¬ Y ”. Hence the last two sentences
show that the root satisfies Part-D of the definition of (L, M )−Conservativeness.
(We do not need to verify it also satisfies the other three parts of this definition
because the root contains no parameter symbols u , and thus these conditions
hold trivially, by default.) 2
2. The Case where Ni+1 stores one of IS-1(A)’s formal axioms. Let
Ψ denote the axiom sentence stored in Ni+1 . Similar to the preceding case, the

only non–trivial aspect of this case is the demonstration that Ψ satisfies Part-D
of the definition of (L, M )−Conservativeness (i.e. that Ψ M is valid under the
Standard Model). The proof of this fact is divided into three sub–cases:
1. Sub-case where Ψ is one of IS-1(A)’s Group-zero or Group-1 axioms: In
this case Ψ is automatically valid under the Standard Model of the Natural
Numbers, and hence so is Ψ M .
2. Sub-case where Ψ is one of IS-1(A)’s Group-2 axioms: Lemma 2’s hypothesis indicates that the union of A with IS-1(A)’s Group-zero and Group-1
schemes is a consistent system. This fact implies that every Group-2 axiom
is valid under the Standard Model. Moreover, Equation (2)’s definition of a
Group-2 axiom indicates that these axioms are encoded as Π1− sentences.
Such Π1− sentences Ψ have the property that Ψ ’s validity automatically
implies the validity of Ψ M .
3. Sub-case where Ψ is IS-1(A)’s Group-3 axioms (formally defined by Equation (3)): Unlike the other sub-cases, we shall not assume the validity of the
sentence Ψ at the start of the proof of this sub-case (see footnote 2 ). However,
Lemma 2’s hypothesis does indicate validity of T op(P, Q) (i.e. see Equation
(16)). The latter, combined with M ’s definition, immediately implies that
Ψ M is valid when Ψ denotes IS-1(A)’s Group-3 axiom. 2
3. The Case where Ni+1 is generated by the ∃-Elimination Rule:
This Elimination rule, defined in Section 2’s second paragraph, allows Ni+1 to
represent a sentence φ(u∗ ) , containing a new parameter symbol u∗ , when an
ancestor of Ni+1 represents the sentence ∃v φ(v) . A key aspect of IS-1(A) is
that Equation (1) is its only axiom using unbounded existential quantifiers. Let
MaxVal(i) denote the maximum of 1 and of the largest quantity, Val(u), stored
in the nodes N1 , N2 , N3 , ...Ni . It is clear that the elimination of an existential
quantifier, originating from Equation (1), will cause Val(u∗ ) ≤ 2 · MaxVal(i).
Moreover since neither any of IS-1(A)’s other proper axioms nor its root
contains unbounded existential quantifiers, the preceding inequality clearly implies MaxVal(i + 1) ≤ 2 · MaxVal(i). This latter inequality, combined with the
facts that MaxVal(1)= 1 and the height of Q’s proof tree is certainly less than
1
∗
3 Log2 (M ) immediately shows that the Val(u ) will satisfy Equation (6)’s constraint. The proof that the node Ni+1 will satisfy the other parts of the definition
of (L, M )-Conservativeness is trivial. 2
4. The Case where Ni+1 is generated by the ∀-Elimination Rule:
This Elimination rule, allows Ni+1 to represent a sentence φ(u∗ ) , when an
ancestor of Ni+1 stores the sentence ∀v φ(v) and u∗ represents a parameter
symbol used in one of Ni+1 ’s ancestors, one of the constants of 0 or 1, or a term
generated from these primitive objects. In each of these cases, a routine inductive
argument shows that φ(u∗ ) must satisfy the (L, M )-Conservative Condition
2

It turns out that IS-1(A)’s Group-3 axiom is a valid statement. However, we cannot
assume its validity during the course of Lemma 2’s proof because Lemma 2’s purpose
is to help prove Theorem 2, and the validity of IS-1(A)’s Group-3 axiom is not evident
until Theorem 2 is formally proven.

because the parameter symbols appearing inside u∗ satisfied Equation (6)
and because the higher node storing “ ∀v φ(v) ” should be inductively presumed
to be (L, M )-Conservative. 2
5. The Case where Ni+1 is generated by the ∧-Elimination Rule:
Trivial because a sentence Υ will automatically satisfy the (L, M )-Conservative
Condition when some ancestor of it storing the sentence Υ ∧ Θ does. 2
6. The Case where Ni+1 is generated by a ¬ Elimination Rule: It
is, once again, trivial that a sentence Υ will automatically satisfy the (L, M )Conservative Condition when some ancestor of it storing the sentence ¬ ¬ Υ does.
Also, a similar trivial argument applies to the other variants of ¬ Elimination
(formally defined in Section 2’s second paragraph). 2
7. The Case where Ni+1 is generated by the ∨-Elimination Rule:
This rule introduces a pair of sibling nodes Υ and Θ when they have a common
ancestor Υ ∨ Θ . Since the inductive hypothesis implies Υ ∨ Θ satisfies the
(L, M )-Conservative Condition, one of Υ or Θ must also satisfy this condition.
Our algorithm PROBE will automatically select this satisfying node. 2
8. The Case where Ni+1 is generated by the ⊃-Elimination Rule:
Essentially the same as the preceding Case 7. 2
PROOF OF LEMMA 3. The general structure of Lemma 3’s proof will
be analogous to Lemma 2’s proof, in that it will again demonstrate the node
Ni+1 satisfies the (L, M )−Conservative condition with an inductive argument
that presumes that the i higher nodes N1 , N2 ...Ni along the path Beta(T,L,M)
already satisfy the (L, M )−Conservative condition. Our inductive proof will be
divided into eight cases, six of which are the same as their analogs in Lemma 2’s
proof (i.e. Cases 2 and 4–8). The remaining two cases appear below:
A) The Case where Ni+1 designates T ’s root: This case differs from
the Case 1 of Lemma 2’s proof because a proof of P of X stores ¬X (which corresponds to Y rewritten in Prenex* Normal form) in its root, rather than ¬Y
(which corresponds to X in Prenex* Normal form). Another distinction is that
Lemma 3’s hypothesis assumes the validity of the condition ¬ Check(X, Y, P, Q),
whereas Lemma 2’s hypothesis presumed Check(X, Y, P, Q). The salient point is
that this shift in Check(X, Y, P, Q)’s Boolean value allows us to conclude that
the new sentence stored in T ’s root, under Lemma 3, is also valid in the Standard
Model of the Natural Numbers. Hence if Ψ denotes the root’s sentence, we can
again conclude the Ψ M is valid, showing that the root satisfies Part-D of the
definition of (L, M )−Conservativeness. (Once again, it is trivial that the root
satisfies the other three parts of the definition of (L, M )−Conservativeness.) 2
B) The Case where Ni+1 ’s Stored Sentence is generated by the
∃-Elimination Rule: The reason this case is different from the Case 3 of
Lemma 2’s proof is that the root of T ’s candidate tree will, for some Π0−
formula φ(v) , correspond to a sentence of the form “ ∃ v φ(v) ” in the
current case. Moreover from the fact that Lemma 3’s hypothesis indicates that
the condition ¬ Check(X, Y, P, Q) is valid, we can presume our valuation will
assure that Val(u) ≤ L , whenever Ni+1 ’s stored sentence “ φ(u) ” is deduced
by eliminating the existential quantifier from “ ∃ v φ(v) ” .

The remainder of our proof for the current case is analogous to Case 3 from
Lemma 2’s proof. It uses again the fact that the only proper axiom of IS-1(A)
containing an unbounded existential quantifier is Equation (1)’s axiom. In particular, let MaxVal(i) again denote the maximum of 1 and of the largest quantity,
Val(u), stored in the nodes N1 , N2 , N3 , ...Ni . We already noted in Lemma 2’s
proof that MaxVal(i + 1) ≤ 2 · MaxVal(i), whenever the node Ni+1 introduces
a new parameter u, generated by eliminating an existential quantifier stemming
from Equation (1). Hence, this observation, combined with the inequality from
the preceding paragraph, implies MaxVal(i + 1) ≤ Max [ L , 2 · MaxVal(i) ].
This recurrence relation, together with the facts that L = 12 · Max(P, Q) ,
M = Max(P, Q) − 1 and that P ’s proof tree has height less than 13 Log2 (M ),
demonstrates that the parameter u, generated by the ∃-Elimination Rule meets
Equation (6)’s requirements. It is, again, trivial to justify it satisfies the other
parts of the definition of (L, M )-Conservativeness. 2
The preceding proofs of Lemmas 2 and 3 also complete our justification for
Theorems 1 and 2. This is because Section 2.1’s proof of these two theorems had
pre-supposed the correctness of Equations (11) and (12), an assumption which
Lemmas 2 and 3 do now corroborate.
Generalizations of Theorem 2 and Added Perspectives. Let H
denote a list of ordered pairs (t1 , p1 ) , (t2 , p2 )...(tn , pn ) , where pk is a Semantic
Tableaux proof of the theorem tk . Define H to be a R( i , j ) TableauxHierarchy Proof of the theorem T from the axiom system α iff T = tn
and H also satisfies the following two conditions:
1. The formal axioms used in pm ’s proof are either one of t1 , t2 , ...tm−1 or
come from α.
2. Each of the sentences t1 , t2 , ...tn−1 are required to have a Πi∗ or Σj∗ format.
Consider a revised form of the IS-1(A) that uses R(1, 1) deduction rather than
conventional semantic tableaux as its underlying formalism. Thus, this version
of IS-1(A), which perhaps should be called IS-1*(A), will have an identical definition as IS-1(A) except that its Group-3 axiom will employ a variant of Eq (3)
where “Prf” now denotes a R(1, 1) proof rather than a conventional tableaux
proof. Thus IS-1*(A)’s Group-3 axiom will be identical to IS-1(A)’s counterpart
except that it will have this type of Prf IS-1*(A) predicate replace Prf IS-1(A) .
A longer version of this paper generalizes Theorem 2 to establish that the
IS-1*( • ) axiom–mapping formalism is “consistency–preserving”. Moreover,
all our formalisms can also be further strengthened so that they support the
additional properties of our article [24]’s Tangibility Reflection Principle.
It also turns out that Theorem 2 and its generalizations collapse when R(2, 1)
deduction replaces R(1, 1). In this case, a generalization of the Second Incompleteness Theorem can establish there exists a Π1− sentence W , provable from
the IΣ0 fragment of Peano Arithmetic, such that no consistent axiom system α
can prove W , prove Addition is a total function and simultaneously recognize
the assured non-existence of a R(2, 1) proof of 0=1 using α’s axioms.

References
1. Z. Adamowicz, “Herbrand Consistency and Bounded Arithmetic”, Fundamenta
Mathematica 171 (2002) pp. 279-292.
2. S. Buss, Bounded Arithmetic, Proof Theory Lecture Notes #3, Bibliopolic 1986.
3. M. Fitting, First Order Logic & Automated Theorem Proving, SpringerVerlag 1990.
4. P. Hájek and P. Pudlák, Metamathematics of First Order Arithmetic, Springer
Verlag 1991.
5. R. Jeroslow, “Consistency Statements in Formal Mathematics”, Fundamenta Mathematica 72 (1971) pp. 17-40.
6. S. Kleene, “On the Notation of Ordinal Numbers”, Journal of Symbolic Logic 3
(1938), pp. 150-156.
7. J. Krajı́cek, Bounded Propositional Logic and Complexity Theory, Cambridge University Press, 1995.
8. G. Kreisel and G. Takeuti, “Formally Self-Referential Propositions for Cut-Free
Classical Analysis”, Dissertationes Mathematicae 118 (1974) pp. 1–55
9. E. Nelson, Predicative Arithmetic, Math Notes, Princeton Press, 1986.
10. R. Parikh, “Existence and Feasibility in Arithmetic”, Journal of Symbolic Logic 36
(1971), pp.494-508.
11. J. Paris and C. Dimitracopoulos, “A Note on the Undefinability of Cuts”, Journal
of Symbolic Logic 48 (1983) pp. 564-569.
12. P. Pudlák, “Cuts, Consistency Statements and Interpretations”, Journal of Symbolic Logic 50 (1985) pp.423-442.
13. P. Pudlák, “On the Lengths of Proofs of Consistency”, in Collegium Logicum:
Annals of the Kurt Gödel Society Volume 2, published (1996) by Springer-WienNewYork, pp 65-86.
14. H. Rogers, Recursive Functions and Effective Compatibility, McGrawHill 1967.
15. R. Smullyan, First Order Logic, Springer Verlag, 1968.
16. R. Solovay, Private Communications (1994) about his generalization of one of
Pudlák’s theorems from [12]. Solovay never published any of his observations about
“Definable Cuts” that several logicians [4, 7, 9, 11–13, 19] have attributed to his
private communications. We provide our short 4-page interpretation of Solovay’s
revised form of Pudlák’s Incompleteness Theorem in Appendix A of [24].
17. G. Takeuti, Proof Theory, Studies in Logic Volume 81, North Holland, 1987.
18. A. Visser, “An Inside View of Exp”, Journal of Symbolic Logic 57 (1992) 131–165
19. A. Wilkie and J. Paris, “On the Scheme of Induction for Bounded Arithmetic”,
Annals of Pure and Applied Logic (35) 1987, 261-302
20. D. Willard, “Self-Verifying Axiom Systems”, Third Kurt Gödel Colloquium (1993),
Springer-Verlag LNCS#713, pp. 325-336.
21. D. Willard, “The Tangibility Reflection Principle”, Fifth Kurt Gödel Colloquium
(1997), Springer-Verlag LNCS#1289, pp. 319–334.
22. D. Willard, “Self-Reflection Principles and NP-Hardness”, Dimacs Series # 39
(1998), pp. 297–320 (AMS Press).
23. D. Willard, “The Semantic Tableaux Version of the Second Incompleteness Theorem Extends Almost to Robinson’s Arithmetic Q”, in Semantic Tableaux 2000
Conference Proceedings, SpringerVerlag LNAI#1847, pp. 415-430.
24. D. Willard, “Self-Verifying Systems, the Incompleteness Theorem and the Tangibility Reflection Principle”, in Journal of Symbolic Logic 66 (2001) pp. 536-596.
25. D. Willard, “How to Extend The Semantic Tableaux And Cut-Free Versions of the
Second Incompleteness Theorem Almost to Robinson’s Arithmetic Q”, Journal of
Symbolic Logic 67 (2002) pp. 465-496.

