On the Tender Line Separating
Generalizations and Boundary-Case
Exceptions for the Second Incompleteness
Theorem Under Semantic
Tableaux Deduction
Dan E. Willard(B)
Computer Science and Mathematics Departments, University at Albany,
Albany, USA
dwillard@albany.edu

Abstract. Our previous research has studied the semantic tableaux
deductive methodology, of Fitting and Smullyan, and observed that it
permits boundary-case exceptions to the Second Incompleteness Theorem, when multiplication is viewed as a 3-way relation (rather than as
a total function). It is known that tableaux methodologies do prove a
schema of theorems, verifying all instances of the Law of the Excluded
Middle. But yet we show that if one promotes this schema of theorems
into formalized logical axioms, then the meaning of the pronoun “I” in
our self-referencing engine changes, and our partial evasions of the Second Incompleteness Theorem come to a complete halt.
Keywords: Semantic tableaux · Hilbert’s Consistency Program ·
Second Incompleteness Theorem · Law of Excluded Middle

1

Introduction

The existence of a significant chasm separating the goals of Hilbert’s consistency
program from the implications of the Second Incompleteness Theorem was evident immediately after Gödel published [20]’s seminal result. We exhibited in
[45–47,49–53] a large number of articles about generalizations and boundary
case exceptions to the Second Incompleteness Theorem, starting with our 1993
article [45]. These papers, which included six papers published in the JSL and
APAL, showed that every extension α of Peano Arithmetic can be mapped onto
an axiom system α∗ that can recognize its own consistency and prove analogs
of all α’s Π1 theorems (in a slightly different language, called L∗ ).
These formalisms were called “Self-Justifying” systems. They were able to
verify their own consistency by containing a built-in self-referencing axiom
which declared “I am consistent” (as will be explained later). In particular,
c Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020

S. Artemov and A. Nerode (Eds.): LFCS 2020, LNCS 11972, pp. 268–286, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-36755-8_17

On the Tender Line Separating Generalizations

269

our axiom systems α∗ used the Fixed-Point Theorem to assure α∗ ’s selfreferencing analogs of the pronoun “I” would enable it to refer to itself in the
context of its “I am consistent” axiomatic declaration.
It turns out that such a self-referencing mechanism will produce unacceptable Gödel-style diagonalizing contradictions, when either α∗ or its particular
employed definition of consistency are too strong. This is because our methodologies only become contradiction-free when α∗ uses sufficiently weak underlying
structures.
These weak structures obviously have significant disadvantages. Their virtue
is that their formalisms α∗ can be arranged to prove more Π1 like theorems than
Peano Arithmetic, while offering some type of partial knowledge about their own
consistency. We will call such formalisms “Declarative Exceptions” to the
Second Incompleteness Theorem.
An alternative type of exception to the Second Incompleteness Theorem,
which we will call an “Infinite-Ranged Exception”, was recently developed
by Sergei Artemov [4] (It is related to the works of Beklemishev [6] and ArtemovBeklemishev [5].) Artemov has observed Peano Arithmetic can verify its own
consistency, from a special infinite-ranging perspective. This means PA will generate an infinite set of theorems T1 , T2 , T3 ... where each Ti shows some subset
Si of PA is unable to prove 0 = 1 and where PA equals the formal union of these
special selected Si satisfying the inclusion property of S1 ⊂ S2 ⊂ S3 ⊂ ....
This perspective is also not a panacea. Thus, the abstract in [4] cautiously
used the adjective of “somewhat” to describe how it sought to partially achieve
the goals sought by Hilbert’s Consistency Program (with an infinite collection of
theorems T1 , T2 , T3 ... replacing Hilbert’s intended goal of finding one unifying
formal consistency theorem).
Our “Declarative”’ exceptions to the Second Incompleteness Theorem and
Artemov’s “Infinite Ranging” exceptions are rigorous results that are nicely compatible with each other. This is because each acknowledged that the Second
Incompleteness Theorem is a strong result, that will admit no full-scale exceptions. Also, these results are of interest because Gödel conjectured that Hilbert’s
Consistency Program would ultimately, reach, some levels of partial success (see
next section). We will explain, herein, how Gödel’s conjecture can be partially
justified, due to an unusual consequence of the Law of the Excluded Middle.
More specifically, we shall focus on the semantic tableaux deductive mechanisms of Fitting and Smullyan [15,39] and their special properties from the perspective of our JSL-2005 article [49]. Each instance of the Law of the Excluded
Middle has been treated by most tableaux mechanisms as a provable theorem,
rather than as a built-in logical axiom. This may, at first, appear to be an
insignificant distraction because most deductive methodologies do not have their
consistency reversed when a theorem is promoted into becoming a logical axiom.
Our self-justifying axiom systems are different, however, because their builtin self-referencing “I am consistent” axioms have their meanings change, fundamentally, when their self-referencing concept of “I” involves promoting a schema
of theorems verifying the Law of Excluded Middle into formal logical axioms.

270

D. E. Willard

This effect is counterintuitive because similar distinctions exist almost
nowhere else in Logic. However some confusion, that has surrounded our prior
work, can be clarified when one realizes that an interaction between the selfreferencing concept of “I” with the Law of Excluded Middle causes the Second Incompleteness Theorem to become activated precisely when the Law of
Excluded Middle is promoted into becoming a schema of logical axioms.
The intuitive reason for this unusual effect is that the transforming of derived
theorems into logical axioms can shorten proofs under the Fitting-Smullyan
semantic tableaux formalism. In a context where our special axiom systems in
Sect. 3 use a self-referencing “I am consistent” axiom and view multiplication as
a 3-way relation (rather than as a total function), this compression will be capable of enacting the power of the Second Incompleteness Theorem. Moreover, the
next chapter will explain how this issue is germane to central questions raised
by Gödel and Hilbert about feasible boundary-case exceptions to the Second
Incompleteness Effect.

2

Revisiting Some Intuitions of Gödel and Hilbert

Interestingly, neither Gödel (unequivocally) nor Hilbert (after learning about
Gödel’s work) would dismiss the possibility of a compromise solution, whereby
a fragment of the goals of Hilbert’s Consistency Program would remain intact.
Thus, Hilbert never withdrew [26]’s statement ∗ for justifying this program:
∗ “Let us admit that the situation in which we presently find ourselves with
respect to paradoxes is in the long run intolerable. Just think: in mathematics,
this paragon of reliability and truth, the very notions and inferences, as everyone learns, teaches, and uses them, lead to absurdities. And where else would
reliability and truth be found if even mathematical thinking fails?”

Gödel was, also, cautious (especially during the early 1930’s) not to speculate
whether all facets of Hilbert’s Consistency program would come to a termination.
He thus inserted the following hesitant caveat into his famous 1931 paper [20]:
∗∗ “It must be expressly noted that Theorem XI” (e.g. the Second Incompleteness Theorem) “represents no contradiction of the formalistic standpoint
of Hilbert. For this standpoint presupposes only the existence of a consistency
proof by finite means, and there might conceivably be finite proofs which cannot
be stated in P or in ...”

Several biographies of Gödel [11,22,55] have noted that Gödel’s intention (prior
to 1930) was to establish Hilbert’s proposed objectives, before he formalized
his famous result that led in the opposite direction. Moreover, Yourgrau’s biography [55] of Gödel records how von Neumann found it necessary during the
early 1930’s to “argue against Gödel himself ” about the definitive termination
of Hilbert’s consistency program, which “for several years” after [20]’s publication, Gödel “was cautious not to prejudge”. It is known that Gödel had hinted
that the Second Incompleteness Theorem was more significant during a 1933
Vienna lecture [21].

On the Tender Line Separating Generalizations

271

Yet despite this endorsement, a YouTube talk by Gerald Sacks [38] explicitly
recalled Gödel telling Sacks, during 1961–1962, that some type of revival of
Hilbert’s Consistency Program would eventually become feasible (as explained
in detail by footnote1 ). This recent Year-2014 YouTube lecture by Gerald Sacks
had caught many scholars by surprise because Gödel published fewer than 85
pages in his life. Thus, Gödel never explicitly recorded, during the second half of
his life, his partial reluctance about the relevance of the Second Incompleteness
Theorem, as Sacks did recall in [38].
The research that has followed Gödel’s seminal 1931 discovery has mainly
focused on studying generalizations of the Second Incompleteness Theorem
(instead of also examining its boundary-case exceptions). Many of these generalizations of the Second Incompleteness Theorem [2,3,7–10,13,16,23–25,29,32–
36,40–44,46–48,50] are quite beautiful. The author of this paper is especially
impressed by a generalization of the Second Incompleteness Effect, arrived at
by the combined work of Pudlák and Solovay together with added research by
Nelson and Wilkie-Paris [31,35,41,44]. These results, which also have been more
recently discussed in [10,23,42,46], have noted the Second Incompleteness Theorem does not require the presence of the Principle of Induction to apply to
most formalisms that use a Hilbert-Frege type of deduction. (The Remark 1 of
the next chapter will offer a detailed summary of this helpful generalization of
the Second Incompleteness Theorem.)

3

Main Notation and Background Literature

Let us call an ordered pair (α, D) a Generalized Arithmetic Configuration
(abbreviated as a “GenAC”) when its first and second components are defined
as follows:
1. The Axiom Basis “α” for a GenAC is defined as its set of proper axioms.
2. The second component “D” of a GenAC, called its Deductive Apparatus,
is defined as the union of its logical axioms “LD ” with its rules for obtaining
inferences.
Example 1. This notation allows us to separate the logical axioms LD , associated with (α, D), from its “basis axioms” α. It also allows us to compare
different deductive apparatuses from the literature. Thus, the DE apparatus,
from Enderton’s textbook [12], uses only modus ponens as a rule of inference,
but it deploys a complicated 4-part schema of logical axioms. This differs from
the DM and DH apparatuses of the Mendelson [30] and Hájek-Pudlák [25] textbooks, which use a more reduced set of logical axioms but require two rules of
inference (modus ponens and generalization). The DF apparatus, from Fitting’s and Smullyan’s textbooks [15,39], actually uses no logical axioms, but
1

Some quotes from Sacks’s YouTube talk [38] are that Gödel “did not think” the
objectives of Hilbert’s Consistency Program “were erased” by the Incompleteness
Theorem, and Gödel believed (according to Sacks) it left Hilbert’s program “very
much alive and even more interesting than it initially was”.

272

D. E. Willard

it instead employs a broader “tableaux style” rule of inference. AN IMPORTANT POINT is that while proofs have different lengths under different apparatuses, all the common apparatuses will produce the same set of final theorems
from an initial common “axiom basis” of α (as explained in footnote2 ).
Definition 1. Let α again denote an axiom basis, D designate a deduction
apparatus, and (α, D) denote their GenAC. Henceforth, (α, D)’s will be called
Self Justifying when
i. one of (α, D)’s theorems (or possibly one of α’s axioms) states that the
deduction method D, applied to the basis system α, produces a consistent
set of theorems, and
ii. the GenAC formalism (α, D) is actually, in fact, consistent.
Example 2. Using Definition 1’s notation, our prior research [45,46,49,50,53]
constructed GenAC pairs (α, D) that were “Self Justifying”. We also proved that
the Incompleteness Theorem implies specific limits beyond which self-justifying
formalisms simply cannot transgress. For any (α, D), all our articles observed it
was easy to construct a system αD ⊇ α that satisfies the Part-i condition (in
an isolated context where the Part-ii condition is not also satisfied). In essence,
αD could consist of all of α’s axioms plus the added “SelfRef(α, D)” sentence,
defined below:
⊕ There is no proof (using D’s deduction method) of 0 = 1 from the
union of the axiom system α with this sentence “SelfRef(α, D)” (looking
at itself).
Kleene [28] was the first to show how to encode analogs of SelfRef(α, D)’s above
statement, which we often call an “I AM CONSISTENT” axiom. Each
of Kleene, Rogers and Jeroslow [27,28,37] emphasized αD may be inconsistent (e.g. violate Part-ii of self-justification’s definition despite the assertion in
SelfRef(α, D)’s particular statement). This is because if the pair (α, D) is too
strong then a quite conventional Gödel-style diagonalization argument can be
applied to the axiom basis of αD = α+ SelfRef(α, D), where the added presence
of the statement SelfRef(α, D) will cause this extended version of α, ironically,
to become automatically inconsistent. Thus, an encoding for “SelfRef(α, D)” is
relatively easy, via an application of the Fixed Point Theorem, but this sentence
is potentially devastating.
Definition 2. Let Add(x, y, z) and M ult(x, y, z) denote two 3-way predicates,
specifying x + y = z and x ∗ y = z, for which the associative, commutative,
identity and distributive properties have Π1 style encodings provable under an
axiom system of α. Then we will say that α recognizes successor, addition and
multiplication as Total Functions iff it can prove all of (1)–(3) as theorems:
2

This is because all the common apparatuses satisfy the requirement of Gödel’s Completeness Theorem.

On the Tender Line Separating Generalizations

273

∀x ∀y ∃z Add(x, y, z)

(1)
(2)

∀x ∀y ∃z M ult(x, y, z)

(3)

∀x∃z Add(x, 1, z)

We will call the GenAC system (α, D) a Type-M formalism iff it includes (1)–
(3) as theorems, Type-A if it includes only (1) and (2) as theorems, and it will
be called Type-S if it contains only (1) as a theorem. Also, (α, D) will be called
Type-NS iff it can prove none of (1)–(3).
Remark 1. The separation of GenAC systems into the categories of Type−NS,
Type-S, Type-A and Type-M systems helps summarize the prior literature about
generalizations and boundary-case exceptions for the Second Incompleteness
Theorem. This is because:
i. The combined research of Pudlák, Solovay, Nelson and Wilkie-Paris [31,35,
41,44], as formalized by Theorem ++, implies that no natural Type−S system (α, D) can recognize its own consistency (and thereby be self-justifying)
when D is one of Example 1’s three examples of Hilbert-Frege style deduction
operators of DE , DH or DM . It thus establishes the following result:
++
(Solovay’s modification [41] of Pudlák [35]’s formalism using
some of Nelson and Wilkie-Paris [31,44]’s methods): Let (α, D)
denote a Type-S GenAC system which assures the successor operation will provably satisfy both x = 0 and x = y  ⇔ x = y. Then
(α, D) cannot verify its own consistency whenever simultaneously D
is some type of a Frege-Hilbert deductive apparatus and α treats
addition and multiplication as 3-way relations, satisfying their usual
associative, commutative distributive and identity axioms.
Essentially, Solovay [41] privately communicated to us in 1994 an analog
of theorem ++. Many authors have noted Solovay has been reluctant to
publish his nice privately communicated results on many occasions [10,25,
31,33,35,44]. Thus, approximate analogs of ++ were explored subsequently
by Buss-Ignjatović, Hájek and Švejdar in [10,23,42], as well as in Appendix A
of our paper [46] and in [48] Also, Pudlák’s initial 1985 article [35] captured
the majority of ++’s essence, chronologically before Solovay’s observations,
Also, Friedman did some closely related work in [16].
ii. Part of what makes ++ interesting is that [46,49,50] presented two cases
of self-justifying GenAC systems, whose natural hybrid is precluded by ++.
Specifically, these results involve using Example 2’s self-referencing “I am
consistent” axiom (from statement ⊕). Thus, they established that some
(not all) Type-NS systems [46,50] can verify their own consistency under
a Hilbert-Frege style deductive apparatus3 , and some (not all) Type-A systems [45,46,49,51] can, likewise, corroborate their consistency under a more
3

The Example 1 had provided three examples of Hilbert-Frege style deduction operators, called DE , DH and DM . It explained how these deductive operators differ from
a tableaux-style deductive apparatus by containing a modus ponens rule.

274

D. E. Willard

restrictive semantic tableaux apparatus. Also, we observed in [47,52] how
one could refine ++ with Adamowicz-Zbierski’s methods [2] to show most
Type-M systems cannot recognize their semantic tableaux consistency.
Remark 2. Several of our papers, starting with our 1993 article [45], have used
Example 2’s “I am consistent” axiomatic declaration ⊕ for evading the Second Incompleteness Effect. Other possible types of evasions rest on the cut-free
methods of Gentzen and Kreisel-Takeuti [19,29], an interpretational approach
(such as what Adamowicz, Bigorajska, Friedman, Nelson, Pudlák and Visser had
applied in [1,17,31,35,43]), or Artemov’s Infinite-Range perspective [4] (where
an infinite schema of theorems replaces one single unified consistency theorem).
We encourage the reader to examine all these articles, each of which has their
own separate virtues. Our focus, in this paper, will be primarily on the next
section’s Theorems 1 and 2. They will show that some types of partial (and not
full) evasions of the Second Incompleteness Effect are possible under a semantic
tableaux deductive apparatus.

4

Main Theorems and Related Notation

A function F is called Non-Growth when F (a1 , . . . , aj ) ≤ M aximum(a1 , . . .
aj ) does hold. Six examples of non-growth functions are Integer Subtraction
(where x − y is defined to equal zero when x ≤ y), Integer Division (where
x ÷ y equals x when y = 0, and it equals x/y otherwise), M aximum(x, y),
Logarithm(x), Root(x, y) = x1/y and Count(x, j) (which designates the number of physical “1” bits that are stored among x’s rightmost j bits). The term
U-Grounding Function will refer to either one of one of these six functions or
the growth-oriented Addition and Double(x) = x + x operations. Our language
L∗ , introduced in [49], was built out of these eight functions plus the primitives
of “0”, “1”, “=” and “≤”.
This language L∗ differs from a conventional arithmetic by EXCLUDING
a formal multiplication function symbol. It CAN VIEW multiplication as a 3way relation (via the use of its Division primitive.) This revised notation will
lead us to a surprisingly strong evasion of the Second Incompleteness Effect.
Let t be any term. The v-based quantifiers used by the wffs ∀v ≤ t Ψ (v) and
∃ v ≤ t Ψ (v) will be called bounded quantifiers. Any formula in our language L∗ ,
all of whose quantifiers are similarly bounded, will be called a ∆∗0 formula. The
Πn∗ and Σn∗ formulae are defined by usual rules except they DO NOT contain
multiplication function symbols. These rules are that:
1. Every ∆∗0 formula will also be a “Π0∗ ” and “Σ0∗ ” formula.
2. A wff will be called Πn∗ when it is encoded as ∀v1 ... ∀vk Φ with Φ being
∗
.
Σn−1
∗
.
3. A wff will be called Σn∗ when it is encoded as ∃v1 ..∃vk Φ, with Φ being Πn−1
Also, the sentence Ψ will be called a Rank-1* statement iff it can be encoded in
either a Π1∗ or Σ1∗ format. (The reader is reminded that our definitions for Π1∗ or

On the Tender Line Separating Generalizations

275

Σ1∗ formulae differ from Arithmetic’s counterparts by excluding multiplication
function symbols.)
There will be three variants of formal deductive apparatus methods, which we
will now compare. The first is semantic tableaux. It will receive the abbreviated
name of “Tab” and correspond to Fitting’s textbook formalism from [15]. (It
is also summarized by us in the attached Appendix A.) Thus, a Tab-proof for
a theorem Ψ , from an axiom basis α is a tree-like structure that begins with
the sentence ¬Ψ stored inside the tree’s root and whose every root−to−leaf
path establishes a contradiction by containing some pair of contradictory nodes
that will “close” its path. The rules for generating internal nodes, along each
root−to−leaf path, are that each node must be either a proper axiom of α
or a deduction from an ancestor node via one of the Appendix A’s six stated
“elimination” rules for the ∧, ∨, →, ¬, ∀, and ∃ symbols.
Our second explored deductive apparatus is called Extended Tableaux, and
shall be abbreviated as “Xtab”. Its definition is identical to Tab-deduction,
except that for any sentence φ in our language L∗ , the sentence φ ∨ ¬φ is allowed
as an internal node in an Xtab proof tree. (In other words, Xtab-deduction differs
from Tab-deduction by allowing all instances of the Law of Excluded Middle to
appear as permitted logical axioms. In contrast, Tab-deduction will view these
instances only as derived theorems.)
Our third deductive apparatus was called Tab-1 in [49]. It is, essentially, a
compromise between Tab and Xtab, where a “Tab-1” proof for Ψ from an axiom
basis α corresponds to a set of ordered pairs (p1 , φ1 ), (p2 , φ2 ), ..(pk , φk ) where
1. φk = Ψ
2. Each pj is a Tab-proof of what we have called a Rank-1* sentence φj from
the union of α with the preceding Rank-1* sentences of φ1 , φ2 , .. φj−1 .
We emphasize Tab-1 deduction can be substantially less efficient than Xtab
because the former requires φj be a Rank-1* sentence, while Xtab does not
impose a similar Rank-1* constraint upon φ , when it invokes its permitted
axiom of φ ∨ ¬φ.
Let us say that an axiom system α owns a Level-1 appreciation of its own
self-consistency (under a deductive apparatus D) iff it can verify that D produces no two simultaneous proofs for a Π1∗ sentence and its negation. Within
this context, where β denotes any basis axiom system using L∗ ’s U-Grounding
language, ISD (β) was defined in [49] to be an axiomatic formalism capable of
recognizing all of β’s Π1∗ theorems and corroborating its own Level-1 consistency under D’s deductive apparatus. It consisted of the following four groups
of axioms:
Group-Zero: Two of the Group-zero axioms will define the constant-symbols,
c̄0 and c̄1 , designating the integers of 0 and 1. The Group-zero axioms will
also define the growth functions of Addition and Double(x) = x + x. (They
will enable our formalism to define any integer n ≥ 2 using fewer than
3 · Logn logic symbols.)

276

D. E. Willard

Group-1: This axiom group will consist of a finite set of Π1∗ sentences, denoted
as F , which can prove any ∆∗0 sentence that holds true under the standard
model of the natural numbers. (Any finite set of Π1∗ sentences F , with this
property, may be used to define Group-1, as [49] had noted.)
Group-2: Let Φ denote Φ’s Gödel Number, and HilbPrfβ (Φ, p) denote a ∆∗0
formula indicating that p is a Hilbert-Frege styled proof of theorem Φ from
axiom system β. For each Π1∗ sentence Φ, the Group-2 schema will contain
the below axiom (4). (Thus ISD (β) can trivially prove all β’s Π1∗ theorems.)
∀p

{HilbPrfβ (Φ, p) ⇒ Φ}

(4)

Group-3: The final part of ISD (β) will be a self-referencing Π1∗ axiom, that
indicates ISD (β) is “Level-1 consistent” under D’s deductive apparatus. It
thus amounts to the following declaration:
# No two proofs exist for a Π1∗ sentence and its negation, when D’s
deductive apparatus is applied to an axiom system, consisting of the
union of Groups 0, 1 and 2 with this sentence (looking at itself ).
One encoding for # as a self-referencing Π1∗ axiom, had appeared in [49].
Thus, (5) is a Π1∗ representation for # where: (1) Prf ISD (β) (a, b) is a ∆∗0
formula indicating that b is a proof of a theorem a from the axiom basis
ISD (β) under D’s deductive apparatus, and (2) Pair(x, y) is a ∆∗0 formula
indicating that x is a Π1∗ sentence and y represents x ’s negation.
∀x∀y∀p∀q

¬ [ Pair(x, y) ∧ Prf ISD (β) (x, p) ∧ Prf ISD (β) (y, q)] (5)

For the sake of brevity, we will not provide the exact details, here, about how (5)
can be encoded via the Fixed Point Theorem. Adequate details were provided
by us in [46,49].
Definition 3. Let “D” denote any one of the Tab, Xtab or Tab-1 deductive
apparatus. Then we will say that the resulting mapping of ISD (•) is Consistency Preserving iff ISD (β) is automatically consistent whenever all the
axioms of β hold true under the standard model of the natural numbers.
The preceding definition raises questions about whether the mappings of
ISTab (•), ISTab−1 (•), and ISXtab (•) are consistency preserving. It turns out that
Theorem 1 will show the first two of these mappings are consistency preserving,
while Theorem 2 explores how the Law of the Excluded Middle conflicts with
ISXtab (•)’s Group-3 axiom.
Theorem 1. The ISTab−1 (•) and ISTab (•) mapping are consistency preserving.
(I.e. the axiom systems ISTab−1 (β) and ISTab (β) are automatically consistent
whenever all β’s axioms hold true under the standard model of the Natural Numbers.)

On the Tender Line Separating Generalizations

277

Theorem 2. In contrast, ISXtab (•) fails to be consistency-preserving mappings.
(More specifically, ISXtab (β) is automatically inconsistent whenever β proves
some conventional Π1∗ theorems stating that addition and multiplication satisfy
their usual associative, commutative, distributive and identity properties.)
The proofs of Theorems 1 and 2 would be quite lengthy, if they were derived
from first principles. Fortunately, it is unnecessary for us to do so here because
we gave a detailed justification of Theorem 1’s result for ISTab−1 (•) in [49], and
one can incrementally modify the Remark 1’s special Invariant of ++ to justify
Theorem 2. Thus, it will be possible for the next two sections of this paper to
adequately summarize the intuition behind Theorems 1 and 2, without delving
into all the formal details.
Part of the reason Theorems 1 and 2 are of interest is because of their surprising contrast. Thus, some historians have wondered whether Hilbert and Gödel
were entirely incorrect when their statements ∗ and ∗∗ suggested some form
of the Consistency Program should likely be viable. Moreover Gerald Sacks’s
Year-2014 YouTube lecture [38] has reinforced this question by recording how
Gödel had repeated analogs of ∗∗’s speculation during 1961–1962. The contrast
between Theorems 1 and 2 will thus provide a plausible suggestion that some
portion of what Hilbert and Gödel advocated may be part-way feasible.
This extended abstract will not have the page space to go into all the details.
However, the next three sections will, be sufficient to communicate the main gist
behind the proofs of Theorems 1 and 2,

5

Intuition Behind Theorem 1

Let us recall the acronym “Tab” stands for semantic tableaux deduction. This
was defined by Fitting [14,15] to be a tree-like proof of a theorem Ψ from an
axiom basis α , whose root consists of the temporary negated assumption of ¬ Ψ
and whose every root−to−leaf path establishes a contradiction by containing
some pair of contradictory nodes that “closes” its path. Each internal node
along these paths must either be a proper axiom of α or be a deduction from
an ancestor node via one of the “elimination” rules associated with the logic
symbols of ∧, ∨, →, ¬, ∀, or ∃ (that are itemized in the attached Appendix A).
Example 3. Let ISM
Tab (•) denote a mapping transformation identical to Theorem 1’s formalism of ISTab (•), except that ISM
Tab shall contain a further multiplication function operation and, accordingly, have its Group-3 “I am consistent”
axiom statements updated to recognize multiplication as a total function. It turns
out this change will cause ISM
Tab (•) to stop satisfying the consistency-preservation
property, which Theorem 1 attributed to ISTab (•).
The intuition behind this change can be roughly summarized if we let
x0 , x1 , x2 , ... and y0 , y1 , y2 , ... denote the sequences defined by:
x0 = 2 = y0

(6)

278

D. E. Willard

xi = xi−1 + xi−1

(7)

yi = yi−1 ∗ yi−1

(8)

For i > 0 , let φi and ψi denote the sentences in (7) and (8) respectively. Also,
let φ0 and ψ0 denote (6)’s sentence. Then φ0 , φ1 , ... φn imply xn = 2n+1 ,
n
and ψ0 , ψ1 , ... ψn imply yn = 22 . Thus, the latter sequence shall grow at an
exponentially faster rate than the former. It turns out that this change in growth
speed will cause the ISM
Tab (•), and ISTab (•) to have opposite self-justification
properties.
In particular, let the quantities Log(yn ) = 2n and Log(xn ) = n + 1 represent
the lengths for the binary codings for yn and xn . Thus, yn ’s coding will have a
length 2n , which is much larger than the n + 1 steps that ψ0 , ψ1 , ...ψn uses to
define yn ’s existence. In contrast, xn ’s binary encoding will have a smaller length
of n + 1. These observations are helpful because every proof of the Incompleteness Theorem involves a Gödel number z encoding a capacity to self-reference
its own definition.
The faster growing series y0 , y1 , ... yn should, intuitively, have this selfreferencing capacity because yn ’s binary encoding has a 2n+1 length that
greatly exceeds the size of the O(n) steps used to define its value. Leaving aside
many of [47,52]’s further details, this fast growth explains roughly why a TypeM logic, such as ISM
Tab , satisfies the semantic tableaux version of the Second
Incompleteness Theorem, unlike ISTab .
Our paradigm also explains why ISTab ’s Type-A formalisms produce
boundary-case exceptions to the semantic tableaux version of the Second Incompleteness Theorem. This is because [49] showed that it was unable to construct
numbers z that can self-reference their own definitions (when only the more
slowly growing addition primitive is available). In particular assuming only two
bits are needed to encode each sentence in the sequence φ0 , φ1 , ...φn , the length
n + 1 for xn ’s binary encoding is insufficient for encoding this sequence.
Leaving aside many of [49]’s details, this short length for xn explains the
core intuition behind [49]’s evasion of the Second Incompleteness Theorem under
ISTab . It arises essentially because of the difference between the growth rates of
the sequences x1 , x2 , x3 ... and y1 , y2 , y3 ....
There is obviously insufficient space for this extended abstract to provide
more details, here. A full detailed proof of Theorem 1 can be found in [49].
It establishes (see4 ) that Peano Arithmetic can prove β’s consistency implies
both the consistency and also the self-justifying properties for ISTab−1 (β). Our
more modest goal, within the present abbreviated paper, has been merely to
summarize the intuition behind Theorem 1’s surprising evasion of the Second
Incompleteness effect.

4

The exact meaning of this implication is subtle. This is because Peano Arithmetic
(PA) cannot know whether β is consistent when β = P A. Thus, unlike the quite
different formalism of ISTab−1 (P A) , the system of PA shall linger in a state of
self-doubt, about whether both PA and ISTab−1 (P A) are consistent.

On the Tender Line Separating Generalizations

279

It arises, intuitively, because of the difference in growth rates between the
x1 , x2 , x3 ... and y1 , y2 , y3 ... series.

6

Summary of the Justification For Theorem 2

The proof of Theorem 2 is complex, but it can be nicely summarized because
it is related to the justification for Invariant ++, which Remark 1 had credited
to the combined work of Pudlák, Solovay, Nelson and Wilkie-Paris. The crucial
aspect of the Frege-Hilbert methodologies, explored by ++, is that modus ponens
assures that a proof of a theorem ψ from an axiom system α has a length no
greater than the sum of the proof-lengths needed to derive φ and φ → ψ from
α. This “Linear-Sum Effect” does not apply, actually, also to Tab-deduction
because it owns no analog of a modus ponens rule (for assuring that ψ’s proof
length is bounded by the sum of the proof lengths for φ and φ → ψ ).
The Xtab methodology, however, differs from Tab-deduction by allowing any
node of its proof-tree to store a sentence of the form φ ∨ ¬ φ , as an application
of its allowed use of the Law of Excluded Middle. This added feature will allow
an Xtab proof for ψ to have a length proportional to the sum of the proof lengths
for φ and φ → ψ (i.e. it can roughly simulate the actions of modus ponens). In
particular, the relevant Xtab proof for ψ will consist of the following four steps:
1. The root of an Xtab proof for ψ will be the usual temporary negated hypothesis of ¬ψ (which the remainder of the proof tree will show is impossible to
hold).
2. The child of this root node will be an allowed invocation of the Law of the
Excluded Middle of the particular form φ ∨ ¬ φ.
3. The relevant Xtab proof tree will next employ the Appendix A’s branching
rule for allowing the two sibling nodes of φ and ¬ φ to descend from Item
2’s node.
4. Finally, our Xtab proof will insert below (3)’s left sibling node of φ a subtree
that is no longer than a proof for φ → ψ, and likewise insert a proof for φ
below (3)’s right sibling of ¬φ.
The point is that the last step of the above 4-part proof has a length no
greater than the sum of the two proof lengths for φ and φ → ψ (similar to
the proof compressions resulting from a modus ponens operation). Its first three
steps shall produce inconsequential effects that increase the overall proof length
by no more than a very tiny amount proportional to the length of the particular
sentence “φ → ψ”.
We can apply the preceeding “Linear-Sum Effect” to construct an analog
of Remark 1’s earlier Theorem ++ that now applies to Xtab deduction. Saving
several details for a longer article, the intuition behind this analog is that modus
ponens is the only rule of inference used by [12]’s classic textbook-style firstorder logic system, and Xtab can apply its Linear-Sum Effect to essentially
simulate modus ponens. Our natural analog of ++ will, thus, assure that any
axiom system A , using Xtab deduction, is automatically inconsistent when:

280

D. E. Willard

I.
II.

A can verify Successor is a total function (as is formalized by Line (1)).
A can prove addition and multiplication (viewed as 3-way relations) satisfy their usual associative, commutative, distributive and identity-operator
properties.
III. A proves an added theorem (which turns out to be false) affirming its own
consistency when the Xtab deductive apparatus is used.
The preceding paragraph has nicely captured the essence of Theorem 2’s
proof. It has noted ISXtab (β) is automatically inconsistent when it satisfies
analogs of the above three requirements (see footnote5 ). This is intuitively
because ISXtab (β) can roughly simulate the power of modus ponens, whose crucial Linear-Sum Effect from modus ponens will be imitated by ISXtab (β) (when
the latter views the Law of Excluded Middle as a schema of logical axioms). Thus,
an analog of Remark 1’s invariant ++ shall apply, consequently, to ISXtab (β).
From a pedagogical perspective, one obvious drawback to this type of justification for Theorem 2 is that it assumes the reader is familiar with either the
combined work of Pudlák, Solovay, Nelson and Wilkie-Paris in [31,35,41,44], or
related work (also mentioned in Remark 1) by Buss-Ignjatović, Friedman, Hájek,
Švejdar [10,16,23,42] and in Appendix A of [46] (or in Willard’s closely related
paper of [48]).
Many readers will, of course be unfamiliar with any of this material because
it relies upon a much more sophisticated version of the Second Incompleteness
Theorem than does appear in most introductory logic textbooks. We have therefore inserted a brief Appendix B into this article. It explains the main idea behind
the Theorem ++, which the Remark 1 credited to a recurring theme appearing
in [10,16,23,25,31,35,41,42,44,46,48].
This appendix will not be sufficiently detailed to formulate the precise nature
of our reductionistic argument for justifying Theorem 2. (The latter will be saved
for a longer version of this article.) Our Appendix B will, however be adequate
to provide the reader with a rough intuitive grasp of the type of extension of
Theorem ++, which is needed to establish Theorem 2’s generalization of the
Second Incompleteness Effect.

7

On the Significance of Theorems 1 and 2

The main topic of this paper is surprising because it is quite unusual for an
initially consistent formalism α to become inconsistent when its initial schema of
theorems (establishing the universal validity of the Law of the Excluded Middle)
is essentially transformed into becoming a formal schema of logical axioms.
The reason for this unusual effect is that the meaning of a Group-3 “I am
consistent” axiom changes, quite substantially, when theorems are transformed
into logical axioms. This is because unacceptable diagonalizing contradictions
5

ISXtab (β) actually satisfies a requirement stronger than Item I because it recognizes
addition as total.

On the Tender Line Separating Generalizations

281

can occur (as summarized by footnote6 ) when such a transition significantly
alters the meaning of an “I am consistent” axiom.
The resulting contrast between Theorems 1 and 2 is helpful in explaining how
Hilbert and Gödel could simultaneously fully appreciate the significance of the
Second Incompleteness Theorem, but yet also allow their statements ∗ and ∗∗
to question whether its paradigm could be partially evaded. Moreover, Gödel’s
remark ∗∗ should not be ignored when Gerald Sacks’s year-2014 YouTube lecture
[38] has recalled how a middle-aged 55-year-old Kurt Gödel had repeated analogs
of his 1931 remark ∗∗ during the 1961–1962 period. (It is also noteworthy that
Harvey Friedman recorded a You-Tube lecture [18] in 2014 where he indicated he
was tentatively open to the possibility that the Second Incompleteness Theorems
might permit some type of limited forms of partial exceptions to it.)
Thus, while there is no doubt that the Second Incompleteness Theorem will,
certainly, always be remembered for its seminal impact on 20th century Logic, its
part-way exceptions should also be seen as significant. This is because futuristic
high-tech computers will better understand their self-capacities if they own some
partial awareness about their own consistency.
There is no page space to go into all the details here. However, the distinction
between the initial “IS(A)” system from our 1993 and 2001 papers [45,46] with
the more sophisticated ISTab−1 (β) formalism in our year-2005 article [49] should,
also, be briefly mentioned. Our older “IS(A)” formalism was actually simpler,
but it was substantially weaker because it only recognized the non-existence
of a proof of 0 = 1 from itself. In contrast, ISTab−1 (β)’s Group-3 axiom can
corroborate that no two simultaneous proofs exist for a Rank-1* sentence and
its negation. This is an important distinction, because the First Incompleteness
Theorem indicates no decision procedure can exist for separating all true from
false Rank-1* sentences. (See also [50,51,53,54] for other particular refinements
for our “IS(A)” formalism.)
In summary, the main purpose of this article has been to explore the contrast between the opposing Theorems 1 and 2. The latter theorem, thus, provides
another helpful reminder about the millenial importance of Gödel’s seminal Second Incompleteness Theorem. Yet at the same time, Theorem 1 illustrates how
some partial exceptions to Gödel’s result do arise, as Hilbert and Gödel had predicted both in their statements ∗ and ∗∗ and in Gödel’s private communications
with Gerald Sacks [38].
The 2-way contrast between Theorems 1 and 2 may be as significant as their
individual actual results. This is because the Second Incompleteness Theorem is
fundamental to Logic. Many historians have, thus, been quite perplexed by the
partial reluctance that Hilbert and Gödel had expressed about it in ∗ and ∗∗. A
partial reason for this reluctance is, perhaps, significantly related to the contrast
between these two opposing theorems.

6

The point is that proofs are compressed when theorems are transformed into logical
axioms, and such compressions can produce diagonalizing contradictions under some
Type-A logics using “I am consistent” axioms.

282

D. E. Willard

Acknowledgment. I thank Seth Chaiken for several helpful comments about how to
improve the presentation.

Appendix A: Formal Definition of a Tableaux Proof
Our definition of a semantic tableaux proof is similar to analogs in the textbooks
by Fitting and Smullyan [15,39]. A tableaux proof of a theorem Ψ from a set of
proper axioms, denoted as α , will be a tree structure whose root contains the
temporary contradictory assumption of ¬ Ψ and whose every descending rootto-leaf branch affirms a contradiction by containing both some sentence φ and
its negation ¬ φ. Each internal node in this tree will be either a proper axiom of
α or a deduction from a higher ancestor in this tree using one of the following
six elimination rules for the logical connective symbols of ∧, ∨, →, ¬, ∀ and ∃.
These rules use a notation where “A =⇒ B” is an abbreviation for a sentence B
being an allowed deduction from its ancestor of A.
1. Υ ∧ Γ =⇒ Υ and Υ ∧ Γ =⇒ Γ .
2. ¬ ¬ Υ =⇒ Υ. Other rules for the “ ¬ ” symbol are: ¬(Υ ∨ Γ ) =⇒ ¬Υ ∧ ¬Γ ,
¬(Υ → Γ ) =⇒ Υ ∧ ¬Γ , ¬(Υ ∧ Γ ) =⇒ ¬Υ ∨ ¬Γ , ¬ ∃v Υ (v) =⇒ ∀v¬ Υ (v) and
¬ ∀v Υ (v) =⇒ ∃v ¬Υ (v)
3. A pair of sibling nodes Υ and Γ is allowed when their ancestor is Υ ∨ Γ.
4. A pair of sibling nodes ¬Υ and Γ is allowed when their ancestor is Υ → Γ .
5. ∀v Υ (v) =⇒ Υ (t) where t may denote any term.
6. ∃v Υ (v) =⇒ Υ (p) where p is a newly introduced parameter symbol.
A minor additional comment about our notation is that we treat “∀ v ≤ s Φ(v)”
as an abbreviation for ∀v {v ≤ s → Φ(v)} and likewise “∃ v ≤ s Φ(v)” as an
abbreviation for ∃v { v ≤ s ∧ Φ(v) }. In our year-2005 article [49], we thus
applied Rules 5 and 6 to derive the following further hybrid rules for processing
the bounded universal and also the bounded existential quantifiers:
a. ∀v ≤ s Υ (v) =⇒ t ≤ s → Υ (t) where t may be any arithmetic term.
b. ∃v ≤ s Υ (v) =⇒ p ≤ s ∧ Υ (p) where p is a new parameter symbol.

Appendix B: More Details About Theorem 2’s Proof
The most surprising aspect of Theorem 2 is the sharp contrast between its result
with the opposing property of Theorem 1. Our goal in this appendix will be to
intuitively explain why the Invariant ++ (from Remark 1) ushers in a machinery
that applies only to Theorem 2.
During our discussion, we will employ our U-Grounding language L∗ that
treats multiplication as a 3-way relation (rather than as a functional operation).
Its 3-way predicate Mult(x,y,z), for formalizing multiplication, is defined as follows:
[(x = 0 ∨ y = 0) ⇒ z = 0] ∧ [(x = 0 ∧ y = 0) ⇒ (

z−1
z
=y ∧
< y)]
x
x

(9)

On the Tender Line Separating Generalizations

283

We will say that an axiom basis α is Regular iff
1. It presumes all the U-Grounding operations are total functions (including the
Addition and Doubling primitives).
2. It can prove all true ∆∗0 sentences, and α is also consistent.
3. It can prove a Π1∗ theorem showing addition and multiplication, viewed as
3-way relations, satisfy their usual associative, commutative, distributive and
identity-operator properties.
Also in this appendix, we will employ a notation where for any j ≥ 0, the
symbol ωj (x) will be recursively defined by the following rules:
1. ω0 (x) = x2 .
2. ωj+1 (x) = 2ωj (2 · Log2 (x+1))
These two rules imply that ωj+1 (x) > ωj (x) and ω1 (x) ≥ xx .
Clarification About Notation: Since our U-Grounding language L∗ does not
permit using any function symbols to grow as fast as multiplication, it does not
technically allow us to use any of the ωj primitive symbols. One can, however,
use techniques from [25]’s textbook to construct a ∆∗0 formula ψj (x, y) that
satisfies (10)’s invariant for all standard numbers. It will, thus, capture most of
ωj ’s salient features.
∀x∀y

ψj (x, y) ⇔ ωj (x) = y

(10)

Definition 4. A formula Φ(x) will be called Locally-J-Closed relative to the
axiom basis α iff α can prove the following three assertions about Φ(x) :
A. All of Φ(0), Φ(1) and Φ(2) are true.
B. The predicate Φ(x) is operationally closed under the growth operation ωj .
(Line (11) formally encodes this closure condition, using the preceding paragraph’s notation.)
∀x ∀ y

{[ψj (x, y) ∧ Φ(x)] ⇒ Φ(y)}

(11)

C. The predicate Φ(x) is also closed under (12)’s decrement operation.
∀ x ∀ y < x {Φ(x)

⇒

Φ(y)}

(12)

Theorem 3. For each regular axiom basis α (that is consistent) and for each
fixed integer J ≥ 1, there exists a corresponding formula Φ(x) where α can prove
that Φ(x) is Locally-J-Closed.
Due to a lack of page space, a formal proof of Theorem 3 will be postponed
until a longer version of this article. Theorem 3 is related to various intermediate
results that were used to establish Remark 1’s Invariant ++ and [10,16,23,25,
31,35,41,42,44,46,48]’s closely related results.

284

D. E. Willard

The fascinating feature of Theorem 3 is that it can explain why Theorems 1
and 2 display nearly opposite effects with regards to Hilbert’s Second Open Question. This is because the needed diagonalization for producing Theorem 2’s variations of the Second Incompleteness Effect become feasible only7 when ISXtab (β)’s
Linear-Sum Effect is applied to the intermediate results produced by its possible
derived theorems (which include the formalisms that are illustrated by lines (11)
and (12)). On the other hand, no such similar types of nicely compressed constructed proofs are available under Theorem 1’s IST ab−1 (β) formalism (because
all instances of the Law of Excluded Middle are excluded by it from becoming
logical axioms). This is the intuitive reason that Theorems 1 and 2 display such
sharply contrasting results.

References
1. Adamowicz, Z., Bigorajska, T.: Existentially closed structures and Gödel’s second
incompleteness theorem. JSL 66(1), 349–356 (2001)
2. Adamowicz, Z., Zbierski, P.: On Herbrand consistency in weak theories. Arch.
Math. Log. 40(6), 399–413 (2001)
3. Artemov, S.: Explicit provablity and constructive semantics. Bull. Symb. Log. 7(1),
1–36 (2001)
4. Artemov, S.: The provability of consistency. Cornell Archives arXiv Report
1902.07404v4 (2019)
5. Artemov, S., Beklemishev, L.D.: Provability logic. In: Handbook on Philosophical
Logic, 2nd edn, pp. 189-360 (2005)
6. Beklemishev, L.D.: Reflection principles and provability algebras in formal arithmetic. Russ. Math. Surv. 60(2), 197–268 (2005)
7. Beklemishev, L.D.: Positive provability for uniform reflection principles. APAL
165(1), 82–105 (2014)
8. Bezboruah, A., Shepherdson, J.C.: Gödel’s second incompleteness theorem for Q.
JSL 41(2), 503–512 (1976)
9. Buss, S.R.: Bounded arithmetic. Studies in Proof Theory, Lecture Notes 3, disseminated by Bibliopolis as revised version of Ph.D. thesis (1986)
10. Buss, S.R., Ignjatović, A.: Unprovability of consistency statements in fragments of
bounded arithmetic. APAL 74(3), 221–244 (1995)
11. Dawson, J.W.: Logical Dilemmas: The Life and Work of Kurt Gödel. AKPeters
Press (1997)
12. Enderton, H.B.: A Mathematical Introduction to Logic. Academic Press (2001)
13. Feferman, S.: Arithmetization of mathematics in a general setting. FundMath 49,
35–92 (1960)
14. Fitting, M.: Tableau methods of proofs for modal logics. Notre Dame J. Form. Log.
13(2), 237–247 (1972)
15. Fitting, M.: First Order Logic and Automated Theorem Proving. Springer, New
York (1996). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4612-2360-3
16. Friedman, H.M.: On the consistency, completeness and correctness problems. Ohio
State Tech Report (1979). See also Pudlák [36]’s summary of this result
7

Actually, we will only need the “Locally 1-Closure” property to prove that ISXtab (β).
cannot possibly be self-justifying.

On the Tender Line Separating Generalizations

285

17. Friedman, H.M.: Translatability and relative consistency. Ohio State Tech Report
(1979). See also Pudlák [36]’s summary of this result
18. Friedman, H.M.: Gödel’s blessing and Gödel’s curse. (This is “Lecture 4” within a
5-part Ohio State YouTube lecture series, dated 14 March 2014)
19. Gentzen, G.: Die Wiederpruchsfreiheit der reinen Zahlentheorie. Math. Ann. 112,
439–565 (1936)
20. Gödel, K.: Über formal unentscheidbare sätze der Principia Mathematica und verwandte systeme I. Monatshefte für Mathematik und Physik 38, 349–360 (1931)
21. Gödel, K.: The present situation in the foundations of mathematics. In: Feferman,
S., Dawson, J. W., Goldfarb, W., Parsons, C., Solovay, R.M. (eds.) Collected Works
Volume III: Unpublished Essays and Lectures, pp. 45–53, Oxford University Press
(2004)
22. Goldstein, R.: Incompleteness: The Proof and Paradox of Kurt Gödel. Norton Press
(2005)
23. Hájek, P.: Mathematical fuzzy logic and natural numbers. FundMath 81, 155–163
(2007)
24. Hájek, P.: Towards metamathematics of weak arithmetics over fuzzy logics. Log.
J. IPL 19, 467–475 (2011)
25. Hájek, P., Pudlák, P.: Metamathematics of First Order Arithmetic. Springer, Heidelberg (1991)
26. Hilbert, D.: Über das unendliche. Math. Ann. 95, 161–191 (1926)
27. Jeroslow, R.: Consistency statements in formal theories. FundMath 72, 17–40
(1971)
28. Kleene, S.C.: On notation for ordinal numbers. JSL 3(1), 150–155 (1938)
29. Kreisel, G., Takeuti, G.: Formally self-referential propositions for cut-free classical
analysis. Dissertationes Mathematicae 118, 1–50 (1974)
30. Mendelson, E.: Introduction to Mathematical Logic. CRC Press (2010)
31. Nelson, E.: Predicative Arithmetic. Mathematics Notes. Princeton University
Press, Princeton (1986)
32. Parikh, R.: Existence and feasibility in arithmetic. JSL 36(3), 494–508 (1971)
33. Paris, J.B., Dimitracopoulos, C.: A note on the undefinability of cuts. JSL 48(3),
564–569 (1983)
34. Parsons, C.: On n−quantifier elimination. JSL 37(3), 466–482 (1972)
35. Pudlák, P.: Cuts, consistency statements and interpretations. JSL 50(2), 423–441
(1985)
36. Pudlák, P.: On the lengths of proofs of consistency. In: Pudlák, P. (ed.) Collegium
Logicum: 1996 Annals of the Kurt Gödel Society, vol. 2, pp. 65–86. Springer,
NewYork (1996). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-7091-9461-4 5
37. Rogers, H.A.: Theory of Recursive Functions and Effective Compatibility.
McGrawHill (1967)
38. Sacks, G.: Some detailed recollections about Kurt Gödel during a June 2, 2014
YouTube lecture given by Gerald Sacks at the University of Pennsylvania. This
lecture records the experiences of Sacks when he was a 1-year assistant for Gödel
at the Institute of Advanced Studies. Some quotes from this talk are that Gödel
“did not think” the goals of Hilbert’s Consistency Program “were erased” by the
Incompleteness Theorem, and that Gödel believed (according to Sacks) that it left
Hilbert’s program “very much alive and even more interesting than it initially was”
39. Smullyan, R.: First Order Logic. Dover Books (1995)
40. Solovay, R.M.: Injecting Inconsistencies into models of PA. APAL 44(1–2), 102–132
(1989)

286

D. E. Willard

41. Solovay, R.M.: Private Telephone conversations during April of 1994 between Dan
Willard and Robert M. Solovay. During those conversations Solovay described an
unpublished generalization of one of Pudlák’s theorems [35], using some methods of
Nelson and Wilkie-Paris [31,44]. (The Appendix A of [46] offers a 4-page summary
of our interpretation of Solovay’s remarks. Several other articles [10,25,31,33,35,44]
have also noted that Solovay often has chosen to privately communicate noteworthy
insights that he has elected not to formally publish)
42. Švejdar, V.: An interpretation of Robinson arithmetic in its Grzegorczjk’s weaker
variant. Fundamenta Informaticae 81, 347–354 (2007)
43. Visser, A.: Faith and falsity. APAL 131(1–3), 103–131 (2005)
44. Wilkie, A.J., Paris, J.B.: On the scheme of induction for bounded arithmetic. APAL
35, 261–302 (1987)
45. Willard, E.: Self-verifying axiom systems. In: Gottlob, G., Leitsch, A., Mundici,
D. (eds.) KGC 1993. LNCS, vol. 713, pp. 325–336. Springer, Heidelberg (1993).
https://doi.org/10.1007/BFb0022580
46. Willard, D.E.: Self-verifying systems, the incompleteness theorem and the tangibiltiy reflection principle. JSL 66(2), 536–596 (2001)
47. Willard, D.E.: How to extend the semantic tableaux and cut-free versions of the
second incompleteness theorem almost to Robinson’s arithmetic Q. JSL 67(1),
465–496 (2002)
48. Willard, D.E.: A version of the second incompleteness theorem for axiom systems
that recognize addition but not multiplication as a total function. In: Hendricks,
V., Neuhaus, F., Pedersen, S.A., Sheffler, U., Wansing, H. (eds.) First Order Logic
Revisited, pp. 337–368, Logos Verlag, Berlin (2004)
49. Willard, D.E.: An exploration of the partial respects in which an axiom system
recognizing solely addition as a total function can verify its own consistency. JSL
70(4), 1171–1209 (2005)
50. Willard, D.E.: A generalization of the second incompleteness theorem and some
exceptions to it. APAL 141(3), 472–496 (2006)
51. Willard, D.E.: On the available partial respects in which an axiomatization for real
valued arithmetic can recognize its consistency. JSL 71(4), 1189–1199 (2006)
52. Willard, D.E.: Passive induction and a solution to a Paris-Wilkie open question.
APAL 146(2), 124–149 (2007)
53. Willard, D.E.: Some specially formulated axiomizations for IΣ0 manage to evade
the Herbrandized version of the second incompleteness theorem. Inf. Comput.
207(10), 1078–1093 (2009)
54. Willard, D.E.: On how the introducing of a new θ function symbol into arithmetic’s formalism is germane to devising axiom systems that can appreciate fragments of their own Hilbert consistency. Cornell Archives arXiv Report 1612.08071
(2016)
55. Yourgrau, P.: A World Without Time: The Forgotten Legacy of Gödel and Einstein.
(See page 58 for the passages we have quoted.) Basic Books (2005)

