Self-Verifying Axiom Systems
Dan E. Willard *
University at Albany
We introduce a class of First Order axiom systems which can simultanequsly
verify their own consistency and prove more R 1 theorems than Peano Arithmerle. Despite these strengths, our axiom systems do not violate Godel's Incompleteness Theorem because they treat multiplication as a partial function.

1. Introduction: Define an axiom system A to be self-verifying iff
i)

one of the theorems implied by A is the statement of its own consistency, and

ii)

the axiom system is in fact consistent.

Rogers has noted that Kleene's Fixed Point Theorem implies every recursively enumerable axiom system A can be easily expanded into a broader system A* which
satisfies condition (i) [Ro67]. The catch is that A* can be inconsistent even while
it asserts its own consistency, hence violating condition (ii). This problem arises not
only in Godel's paradigm, where A has at least the strength of Peano Arithmetic
(PA), but also for many axiom systems which are much weaker than PA. For
instance, [Fe88] shows that even a weakened axiom system that includes only PA's
]~-Induction Principle can not be self-verifying, and [Bu86] provides proofs of
some versions of Godel's Second Theorem for certain very weak cut-free systems.
Examples of self-verifying axiom systems in the prior literature include
[Bo79, Je71, Kr71, KT74, Ro67, Ta53]. Our axiom system is the first example of a
First Order self-verifying system that can prove the 1I1 theorems of Peano Arithmetic. [Ta53,KT74] illustrated how Second Order cut-free self-verifying systems
could prove translated mappings of the theorems of Peano Arithmetic into a second
order language (where the combined caveats about translation and cut-free proofs
preclude a violation of Godel's Incompleteness Theorem). Our system will rest on a
very different principle, which requires no translation into Second Order logic and
instead treats multiplication as a partial function. The current version of our result
requires cut-free deduction, but we conjecture this requirement can be dropped.
It is known that there exists unnatural deduction methods (which are numerically correct but intensionally incorrect) that support very strong self-verification
[Fe60]. Our research studies a very different type of problem, where the rule of
inference is required to be an intensionally correct, very natural method, similar to
say semantic tableaux or resolution from automated theorem proving [Fi90].
*Partially funded by NSF 9060509. Author'sAddress: CS Department,SUNYA, Albany,NY 12222

326
Part of the motivation for this paper is that when human beings normally
think, they implicitly presume their own consistency (otherwise it makes little sense
to attempt to mason). Hence, there should exist moderately strong self-verifying
axiom systems that formalize such implicit serf-confidence. Also in the distant
future computers should be able to imitate such human self-confidence.
2. General Perspectives: This section defines a new family of axiom systems, called the Introspective Semantics (IS), which are capable of proving their
own consistency. Let A denote a recursive axiom system. Then the axiom system
IS(A) will consist essentially of the following three groups of axioms.
i)

an initial group defining a preliminary set of functions and relations,

ii)

the statement that all Ill theorems (defined formally on the next page), proven by "the inner axiom system" A, are true;

iii)

the statement that the full system IS(A) is consistent (including this sentence).

Our chief goal will be to assure that if A is consistent then it will automatically
follow that IS(A) is also consistent. As noted in section 1, there are many examples
of well-defined axiom systems which assert their own consistency but which are
inconsistent. An example is PA* which consists of all the axioms of Peano Arithmetic (PA) plus the assertion "Peano Arithmetic is consistent, and so is the combination of Peano Arithmetic with this last statement" [Ro67]. Our main theorem will
show that IS(A) does not suffer an inconsistency problem analogous to PA*.
We will now describe IS(A) formally. Its first axiom group will define the
arithmetic functions of additions, subtraction, division, and some further functions:
i)
Count (x,y) = the number of repetitions of the binary encoding of the integer y in x.
ii)
Shift (x, y) designating the integer z = x/2 y.
iii)
Remove (x,y,z) designating the integer w whose i-th bit = the (y + i z)-th bit of x.
iv)
Extract (x,y,z) designating the integer w which stores the same values as x between
bit-positions y and z, and stores zeroes everywhere else.
v)
Compress (x,y) designating the integer z whose i-th bit is the j-th bit of x if the j-th bit
of y is the i-th appearance of the bit "1" in y.
vi)
Andreverse(x,y,i,j) designating the string obtained by reversing x's sequence of bits
between the addresses i and j and then taking the bitwise AND of the result with y.
vii) Andmacro (x,y) designating the integer z whose i-th bit equals 1 if and only if all the
bits of x equal 1 between the positions of (i-l)y +1 and iy.
viii) Andmultiply (x,y,z) designating the integer w obtained by multiplying x times y and
the bitwise ANDing the result with z.
ix)
Andexpand (x,y,z) designating the integer w whose yi-th bit equals the bitwise AND
of the i-th bit of x and the yi-th bit of z (and whose other bits = 0).
x)
Address(x,y,z,i) indicating the least j where there are i more appearances of the substring y~'O than of z among the first j bits of x (if such j exists), and j = O otherwise.
xi)
Width(x) = the longest sequence of consecutive 1's in x.
Other axioms in the first group will be the definitions of the usual relations equality
and greater-than and of the integer constants 0, 1, 2, 3 .... (For k > 0, the axioms for
are k = k - 1+ 1 and Vx x<k" ~ x=OVx=TV . . - vx=k--1.)

327

At first, it may appear that IS(A) must be very weak if it treats multiplication
as an (implicitly defined) relation rather than as a function. However, the reader
should withhold judgment until the end of this section. Note even absent multiplication, the preceding functions are sufficient to render expressible a recursive predicate
Turing(x,y,z), which states x is an encoding of the first y states of a Turing machine
whose initial state is z. Thus, the language of IS(A) is significantly stronger than
Presburger Arithmetic, where the predicate Turing(x,y,z) is inexpressible.
Notation: A sentence ~, written in prenex normal form will be called H1 iff
each variable x introduced by an existential quantifier in that sentence is required to
either have a value less than or equal to the maximum of the universally quantified
variables enclosing it, or x is required to be less than a prespecified constant. Similarly, a prenex sentence ~* will be called Xl iff it is equivalent to '% ~ " where 9 is
II 1. The sentence 9 will be called A0 iff all its universally and existentially
quantified variables are required to be less than constants. (The A0 sentences are
defined slightly differently in some textbooks.) Finally a wff ~(xl x2 "'" xj),
whose only free variables are xl x2 "'" xj will be called a Ao formula iff all
universally and existentially quantified variables in that wff are required to be less
than or equal to either Max (xi x2 9 9 9 xj) or some prespecified constant.
Define a first-order axiom system A to be nice iff A is consistent with the
Group-1 axioms of IS and there exists a A0 formula AxA(y) that expresses that y is
the Godel number of an axiom of A. (Every r.e. axiom system, which is consistent
with Group-l, can be mapped onto a nice system that proves all its theorems.) For
technical reasons, it is convenient to view all encodings of proofs as one of semantic
tableaux, resolution, or cut-free sequent calculus. The Godel Completeness Theorem
holds for each of these methods [Fig0,Sm68,Ta87]. We rely mostly on the semantic
tableaux deduction method in this paper. Also our results are slightly stIengthenned
if we assume one is allowed to slightly compress a proof p by physically writing
the bit representation of any "long constant" k only once and storing its other
appearances as pointers to this long representation.
Let PrfA(x,y) denote the Ao formula asserting that y is a proof of x from
axiom system A. Since Turing(a,b,c) and AxA(d) are both Ao formulae, it is possible to encode PrfA(x,y) as a 6o formula. (There is insufficient space to give the
details of PrfA(x,y)'s encoding within the 12-page limit of this Extended Abstract.
For readers prefering simplicity, one can think of provability as a 3-variable A0 formula PrfA (X, Yl, Y2), asserting that yl is a proof of x using axiom system A and
Y2 is a Godel encoding of the successive states of a Turing machine confirming y~
is well defined. In this alternate case, it is trivial to construct an encoding of the provability formula, and our final results are weakened only slightly.)
In our discussion, PrA(x ) denotes the formula "3yPrf,~(x,y)", and F~]
denotes ~ ' s Godel number. Then for each 1-I1 sentence ~ , the second axiom group
will contain one sentence of the form:

328

PrA(

)=

(2.1)

Note (2.1) is I71 (when written in prenex normal form) because PrfA(x,y) is AO
The third axiom group of IS(A) will consist of a single sentence asserting
"The union of the first two groups of axioms with this very sentence forms a consistent set of axioms." This self-referential sentence is known to be well defined via
fixed point operators (see [Ro67Je71]. As noted before, we will discuss proofs in
this paper in the semantic tableaux formalism [Fig0]. In this formalism, an inconsistency proof is a semantic tableaux whose axioms are those of IS(A) where all
paths of the semantic tableaux are closed. If 3_ is the empty sentence then selfconsistency formally corresponds to the statement:
V y --iPrfls<A)(• Y)

(2.2)

The main theorem of this paper will state that if A is nice then IS(A) must be
consistent. Our formal discussion will appear in the next four sections. The
remainder of this section will explain intuitively why IS treats addition as a function, but multiplication only as a relation. The axiom system IS was intended to
enable computerized algorithms to prove their own consistency. For simplicity, let
us temporarily assume our formal system is a finite state machine with b bits of
memory. Then the formal system will be technically unable to construct integers
larger than 2 b. Thus ill one sense, assertion (2.3) can be viewed as incorrect
because z can exceed 2b when x and y are b-bit integers exceeding 2 b-1 .
VxVygz

: z =x+y

(2.3)

Nevertheless, there will be another very different, somewhat informal interpretation
of equation (2.3) where the expression can be viewed as valid, even when the variables x, y and z have fixed bounded domains. Let us interpret (2.3) as stating whenever our finite state machine has enough storage space to ask the question "What is
the value of x + y?", it also has enough memory available to store the answer. In
particular, since the symbol "+" must require at least one bit of storage, the variables
x and y must require fewer than b - 1 bits, implying there is sufficient space in a bbit memory to store their sum z.
The interesting facet is that the analog of (2.3) is not applicable to multiplication. Consider the equation
Vx3z

: z

= x*x

(2.4)

Then if x = 2 3b/4, the right hand side of (2.4) can be stored in fewer than b bits of
memory while z > 2 b can not be! At first, it may appear that this counterexample is
artificial because it requires at least two occurrences of the same variable x on the
fight sides of (2.4). However, the proof of Godel's Incompleteness Theorem used
essentially the same double appearance of a variable when it provided a counterexample to self-verification via a diagonalization argument. Hence, since IS treats

329

multiplication as a relation rather than as a function, the classic Hilbert-Bernays
paradox of an axiom system becoming automatically inconsistent as soon as it
proves its own consistency will simply be inapplicable to IS!l
Moreover, IS does not lose much information relevant to pragmatic computation by viewing multiplication as not being a function. Consider the example
r

=

{ Vx<~-w'w Vy<'~w 3 z < w : z = x * y }

(2.5)

Then IS(Peano) can prove the sentence Vw ~(w) (by using the Group-2 axioms
and the fact that this sentence is provable in Peano Arithmetic). This example and
its generalizations illustrate that although IS(Peano) can not prove multiplication formally to be a function, it will still be able to treat multiplication as a function in the
typical concrete applications involving integers. (For engineering applications
involving real numbers, one may need multiplication to be a function in a more
complete sense; fortunately, it turns out that IS can represent multiplication as a
function on floating point representations of real numbers, provided there are some
form of (very weak) conslraints on the bit-length of the mantissa.)
The axiom family IS(A) can be intuitively regarded as a class of structures
lying halfway between Peano Arithmetic and Presburger Arithmetic, which satisfy
Godel's First but not Second Incompleteness Theorems. That is, since the predicate
Turing (x,y,z) is expressible under IS(A), there clearly can exist no decision procedure for classifying the theorems provable from IS(A). On the other hand, unlike
Peano Arithmetic, IS(A) will be able to verify its own consistency.
Another way to motivate the axiom system IS is to consider a philosopher's
answer to the question of whether multiplication is a function. His first answer
would likely be "of course yes". But if one then asked the philosopher to construct
a sequence of natural numbers ao, al, a2, a3 ... where ao-> 2 and ai+1 (ai) 2, a
hedge would quickly follow because an requires at least 2" bits. The expected
answer would then be that "multiplication is a function in theory but not always in
practice". Note that the philosopher would not give this answer about addition
because the sequence b0, bl, b2, b3 ... with bi+l = bi + bi is characterized by proofs
of the existence of bn requiring more bits than b,'s binary encoding (at least when
the Principle of Induction is unavailable to say semantic tableaux proofs). This
means there will always be adequate memory to write down the binary representation of i~ when there is sufficient memory for storing the proof of its existence
(whereas the same is plainly not true when multiplication is assumed to be a function because then a,i's existence proof is exponentially shorter than its binary encoding!) For instance, multiplication allows one to prove the existence of a number
a~o within the 400-line length of this paper, whose binary encoding requires more
digits than the number of atoms in the universe. In sharp contrast, even the full
cardinality of the universe is insufficient for the Addition Axioms to prove the
existence of a number whose bit length is as large as the universe!
=

330

Thus as a metaphor, the multiplication function can be viewed as tempting
man to try to step out of his own conceptual universe, whereas Goders Second
Incompleteness Theorem can be viewed as a warning of the very severe consequences that then follow O.e. epistemological uncertainty and self-doubt).
The viewpoint of the axiom system IS(A) is very similar to the philosopher
who declares "multiplication is a function in theory but not always in practice".
The inner axiom system A of IS(A) is allowed to represent multiplication as a function. It corresponds to the theoretical aspect. The outer three groups of axioms in
IS(A) stopped just short of recognizing multiplication as a function, so as to allow
IS(A) to be self-verifying. This formalization is desirable because when human
beings normally think, they must implicitly presume their own consistency (since
otherwise it would make little sense to attempt to reason). The purpose of IS(A) is
thus to formalize the philosophical assumption of self-consistency (which is necessary for epistemology and perhaps the future design of introspective computers).
3. Formal Summary of Main Results: The main theorem in this paper is:
Proposition 1: For each nice axiom system A, IS(A) is consistent.
The reflection statement for a fixed sentence 9 and a fixed axiom system B is
the assertion Vx {PrfB ( rtb], x) w tb}. Three generalizations of Propostion 1 that
are not proven in this 12-page Extended Abstract are:
Proposition 2. Let A denote any extension of Peano Arithmetic that recognizes the Group-1 functions. Then IS(A) can prove its reflection statements for all
A0 sentences, and for the subset of ]"[1 sentences 4) which are decidable (unlike traditional systems by Lob's Theorem [Bo79,Lo55,Me87]).
Proposition 3. Define IS*(A) as an axiom system whose Group-1 and
Group-2 axioms are identical to those of IS(A) and where Group-3 now includes the
stronger assertion that IS*(A)'s Reflection Property is valid for all E1 sentences.
Then for any nice A, IS*(A) is consistent. It is also impossible to slrengthen this
result because IS(A) becomes inconsistent when it includes YI 1 Reflection.
Proposition 4. Let ISVALID denote the generalization of IS which contains
the added functions Booli(g, kl,k2,...ki) where Booli(g, kl,k2,...ki)= b iff ~ is the
Godel number of a Ao formula whose Boolean value equals b when k 1,k2,.,.k i are
substituted for its i arguments, and Booli~,kl,k2,...ki)= 2 otherwise. Also let
ISVALID contain an additional (Group-l) axiom Booli~,kl,k2,...ki) = b when b =
the value of this function. Define FORBIDDEN(A) as the extension of ISVALID
where multiplication is also a function. Then Propositions 1-3 each generalize for
ISVALID, but there exists nice A where FORBIDDEN(A) is inconsistent. (There
are also many alternate systems where Group-1 is defined differently from FORBIDDEN but which are inconsistent for many nice A. These include ISFORBIDDEN,
whose Group-1 functions are all the functions of IS plus multiplication, in a context
of any of several possible cut-free deduction methods).
B

m

331

While Zermelo-Frankel set theory (ZF) can not prove its own consistency
[Go31], section 5 shows surprisingly it can prove Proposition 1. This is exciting
because it means ZF CAN PROVE its consistency equivalent to that of an alternate system IS(ZF), which is self-verifying and affirms the consistency of ZF!!
The one sharp disadvantage of IS is that it is clearly too weak to prove the
validity of the Principle of Induction. However, if one adapts the (admittedly controversial) philosophical perspective that Induction is solely an epistemological means
towards the two ends of proving and of shortening the proofs of 1-I1 theorems, rather
than a final end unto itself, then the inductive weakness of IS(Peano) can be argued
to be less important than its three new strengths. (These are that it is self-verifying,
proves more 1I 1 theorems than Peano Arithmetic, and its proofs of these I71
theorems are sometimes dramatically shorter and never more than a small polynomial factor longer than the analogous Peano proofs.)
4. Intuition Behind Main Theorem: The formal proof of Proposition 1
appears in the next section. In this section, we will sketch the intuition behind the
proof. The proof of Proposition 1 will be by contradiction. It will assume that p is
the minimal integer which is a Godel encoding of an inconsistency proof using the
axiom system IS(A), and show this assumption leads to a contradiction.

The proof utilizes the fact that if A is a nice axiom system, then all the
Group-1 and Group-2 axioms are consistent with each other. Thus p can represent
an inconsistency proof only if the final axiom sentence in Group-3 contradicts the
union of the Group-1 and Group-2 axioms.
The single sentence in Group-3 was the statement that "IS(A) is consistent".
Section 5 will prove that the Group-1 and 2 axioms can contradict this statement
only if the proof p constructs within itself a second "witness integer" p* (not necessarily distinct from p) such that p* is also a proof of IS(A)'s inconsistency.
Since p is defined to be the minimal integer encoding a contradiction proof, it
follows that the witness p* satisfies p* > p. If IS(A) had included multiplication as
a function, it would be possible for an inconsistency proof p to construct within
itself a representation of the necessary p* _>p. (Essentially, section 2 noted that in
strictly fewer than log2p bits, it is possible to encode via multiplication numbers
p* >_p. The consm~ction of p* "inside p" in Proposition 4's proof will use roughly
the analogs of the Eq. (2.4) implied by the proof of Godel's Incompleteness
Theorem.) However, the functions employed by IS(A) were specially chosen so that
a similar witness can not be constructed from IS(A). In particular, the only increasing function that was allowed in IS(A) was the Addition function, and it grows so
slowly that log (x + y) < MAX (log x, log y) +1. This implies that it is impossible
in log2p - 1 bits to encode a number larger than p. Using these facts, it will follow that p cannot possibly he long enough to construct the necessary witness p* > p
for p to he an inconsistency proof.

332

5. Details of Main Proof: This section will give a more formal proof for Proposition 1. Our discussion will not go into the details about the Godel encodings of
expressions similar to "x is a proof of y" because such details are fairly routine and
would cause this 12- page summary of results to become too long. Most aspects of
the Godel encodings are similar to the self-verifying axioms from say [Ro67, Je71],
and the main difference is that Godel's substitution function can betreated only as a
relation by the axiom system IS. That is, define SUBST(a,b) to be the classic Ao formula expressing that if a is the Godel number of a formula Cb(x) then SUBST(a,b)
is satisfied only by that b which is the Godel number of the sentence obtained by
replacing x with the constant a (and where SUBST(a,0) is True when a is not the
Godel number of a formula). Then although IS(A) can not prove
V x 9 y : SUBST(x, y), it can verify for any fixed k that 3 y : SUBST(k, y).
This implies that IS(A) satisfies part (i) of the definition of self-verification (and that
Prfls(A)(x,y) is a A0 formula).
In this section, we will frequently refer to the subcomponents of a particular
sentence. The definition of this construct is slightly different from the notion of a
"subformula". Define a relation ( X, Y / which specifies X is a subcomponent of
Y to be the minimal relation satisfying the following five constants:
i) The formulae X and Y will be subcomponents of X x/Y and X A Y;
ii) The formulae ~ X and Y will be subeomponents of X D Y;
iii) For any parameter c, the formula X(c) will be a subcomponent of
Va X(a) and 3a X(a);
iv) X is a subeomponent of ~ ~ X ; other rules for the symbol ~ are
(~XA--,Y, -,(XVY)),
(~XV--,Y, ~(XAY)),
(XA~Y, ~ ( X ~ Y ) ) ,
( V a ~ X(a), --,3aX(a)) , and ( 3 a ~ X ( a ) , --,VaX(a)).
v) If X is a subcomponent of Y and Y is a subeomponent of Z, then X
will also be a subeomponent of Z.
Note that every semantic tableaux or resolution proof [Fi90, Sm58] of the
inconsistency of an axiom system A must have every sentence of that proof constituting a subcomponent of some axiom of A. This characteristic of semantic
tableaux and resolution proofs will be called their "cut-free" property. It is closely
analogous to Gentzen's notion [Ge69,Ta87] of a cut-free sequent calculus proof.
In this paper, we employ the semantic tableaux methodology as our formalization of a proof. The same analysis can be applied to other cut-free proof methods,
such as resolution or cut-free sequent calculus proofs. It is well known that each of
these methods is complete for First Order Logic [Fig0,Sm58,Ta87].
Let PrfiS(Al(_k, y) denote the provability formula defined in equation (2.2).
Then equation (5.1) is the assertion that IS(A) is inconsistent:

3y PrflS(A)(_I.,
y)

(5.1)

333

L e m m a 1. The sentence (5.1) is not a subcomponent of any Group-1 or
Group-2 axiom of IS(A).

Proof. It is immediate from the definitions of the Group-1 axioms that (5.1)
is not a subcomponent of any of them. A Group-2 axiom has the canonical form
(2.1). Since the definition of Group-2 requires that 9 be a sentence whose existential quantifies all have bounded range, the precise sentence (5.1) can clearly not be
subcomponent of 9 in (2.1). Also, the definition of PrA( ['~] ) implies that (5.1)
can not possibly be a subcomponent of --1 PrA( [-07 ). Q.E.D.
Lemma 2 If the axiom system A is nice then a semantic tableaux proof p
of the inconsistency of IS(A) is impossible without p formally constructing an element p* such that one node of p's proof tree is the sentence ~Prf~s(A)(-l-, p*).
Proof A proof of IS(A)'s inconsistency would consist of a tree whose axioms
come from IS(A) and whose branches are all closed. Since A is nice, the Group 1
and 2 axioms must be certainly consistent with each other and valid under the standard model of the natural numbers. Hence, an inconsistency proof p must use the
Group 1 and 2 axioms to contradict the self-consistency statement (2.2). But
Lemma 1 showed assertion (5.1) was not a subcomponent of any of the Group-1 or
Group-2 axioms! Hence, the necessary contradiction of (2.2) is technically possible
only if the Group-1 and Group-2 axioms contradict a subcomponent of (2.2) of the
form ~PrfIs(A)(Z, p*) rather than actually contradict (2.2) directly.
Q.E.D.
We now introduce further notations that will simplify the main proof. Rather
than use an m-ary function symbol f(xl,XR...x~) to denote a function f, we will
represent each function with (m+l)-ary relation symbol Af(Xl ,x2,...Xm,W) together
with the added axiom Vxl Vx2 ... Vxm 3w : A f ( x 1 X2...Xrn W).
In this context, the semantic tableaux rule for eliminating an existential
quantifier will replace qw ~P(w) with a sentence of the form q~(c) where c is the
symbol for a newly introduced parameter. Similarly, the rule for eliminating the
universal quantifier in Vw ~(w) will replace it with the sentence ~(c), where c is
either one of the natural number symbols 0,1,2,3 .... or a parameter that was introduced during the elimination of an existential quantifier at a tree node position
which is an ancestor to the node specifying <~(c).
Finally, for any particular branch 13 of a proof tree p, let LIST(~,d) denote
the list of all the sentences in 13 whose depth _<d and which do not correspond to a
sentence o f the form (2.2). Say the branch 13 is s-consistent up to the depth d iff
there exists an "interpretation" function, denoted as INT, that assigns an integer
value to each symbol ci such that all IS(A)'s Group-1 and 2 axioms and all the sentences in, LIST(I3,d) are valid when the symbols ci are assigned their designated
integer values under INT.
tion.

We will now use the preceding construct to prove Proposition 1 by contradicLet p denote the minimal integer that encodes a proof of IS(A)'s

334

inconsistency, and let d denote the least integer such that p has no branch that is
s-consistent at the depth d. Then the combination of d's definition and Lemmas 1
and 2 implies there exists at least one branch 13in p with the following properties:
a)

13 is s-consistent up to the depth d-l;

b)

the node in [3 at depth d causing the s-inconsistency consists of a sentence of
the form --, Prfis(A)(-L,p*).

We will now derive a contradiction by showing that INT's depth d-1 interpretation
forces p* to represent another inconsistency proof which is strictly less than p.
Let ml, m2, m3... designate the integer constants appearing in the branch [3
and cl ,c2,c3 ...cj denote the parameters appearing in 13. Let ~
denote the largest
of ml, m2, m3
Then since the proof p consists of only log2p bits and since more
than j of these bits are needed to represent cl c2...cj, it must follow that
. . . .

mmax < P 2 -j

(5.2)

Let INT denote an interpretation that assigns integer values to the constant symbols
Cl c2...cj that is s-consistent up to the depth level d-1. Without loss of generality,
let us also assume that INT(c~)<INT(c2)<INT(c3) etc. We claim it must be true that
INT(cj) < 2i "mm,x

(5.3)

The proof of (5.3) rests on the fact that Addition is the only increasing function defined by IS(A) (see the last paragraph of Section 4) and that the existential
quantifiers in the Group-2 axioms are nonincreasing (because of the requirement
that 9 in a Group-2 axiom be a 171 sentence). More formally, the essential point is
that if c4 is the largest constant before the addition function defines a new parameter
ci+l then it must be true that INT(ci+l ) < 2INT(ci). Hence, equation (5.3) follows
because no more than j doublings are associated with ClC2...cj, and the largest constant before these doublings occur is bounded by mm,x.
The combination of (5.2) and (5.3) imply that p* in 13's depth d node satisfies
INT(p*) < MAX (INT(cj), m--"~ax) < p.

(5.4)

But since [3 becomes s-inconsistent precisely at the point where the sentence
--,PrfIS(A)(~, p*) is introduced, it follows that p* must represent (under INT's depth
d-1 interpretation) another inconsistency proof! This observation provides the
desired contradiction, since p was presumed to be the smallest inconsistency proof.

6. Philosophical Implications and Main Conjecture
Propositions 2 thru 4 illustrate many possible generalizations of IS(A). We
suggest that IS(A,g,d) and IS*(A,g,d) denote such generalizations where g is the
set of proposed Group-1 Axioms and d is the deduction method, and that these formalisms be called IS-like systems.

335

While ZF set theory can not prove its own consistency [Go31], section 5
showed that it can prove Proposition 1. This is a bit exciting because it means ZF
can prove its own consistency is equivalent to an alternative IS(ZF), which is self.
verifying and affirms the consistency of ZF. Indeed, IS(ZF) confirms ZF's 1-11 validity. This raises the philosophical question of whether when humans think they are
using ZF to reason, they may be actually relying upon IS(ZF) unconsciously ???
A cut can be informally defined as a detour in a theorem proof (following
from an unnecessary application of the Law of the Excluded Middle) that is considered redundant because the theorem can also be established more directly without
it. See [Ta87] for the formal definition. Although proof systems with and without
cuts are known to prove the identical set of theorems, a system employing cuts and
looking at its own set of Godel numbers nevertheless has sharply different properties
than the analogous cut-free system. For instance [Bu86,KT74,Ta53] provide proofs
of the Second Incompleteness Theorem that are only applicable [Bu93] in the presence of cuts. Let us therefore define IS§
and IS~(A) to be the natural generalizations of IS(A) and IS*(A) that permit cuts. A central open question is whether or not
these two systems also satisfy part (ii) of the definition of self-verification.

We conjecture that the answer to both open questions is " yes" because it
would be hard to visualize otherwise how humans can instinctively recognize their
own self-correctness. Aside from its clear epistemological implications, the answer
to this problem should be .valuable to computer science because in the distant future
computers should ideally be capable of imitating the human's innate capacity to
understand (and appreciate the implications of) one's own consistency. Moreover, if
this conjecture is correct, then IS(A) must be substantially different from
[Ta53,KT74]'s CFA system, since Kriesel and Takeuti have shown the latter supports self-verficafion only when cuts are absent,t
One possible outcome to this open problem could be that for some nice A
there is no set-theoretic proof of Proposition l's analog for IS+(A) and IS+(A),
although these systems are in fact self-verifying. In this case, IS§
and IS~(A)
could explain how human beings can stubbornly recognize (and indeed appreciate
the implications of) their own consistency, but yet they may be eternally unable to
ever formally justify this necessary epistemological assumption (with an explicit
construction analogous to Proposition l's proof).

Acknowledgements: I warmly thank the University of Tel Aviv for hosting
my sabbatical in 1992 while this paper was conceived. As a child of two parents
who barely survived the Holocaust, I was especially glad to spend my sabbatical in
Israel. I thank Sam Buss, Paliath Narendran, Robert Paige, Dan Rosenkrantz and
Moshe Vardi for comments on the presentation, and I thank the Computer Science
Department of the University at Albany for providing me with the extra time needed
to write up this draft.

336

References

[Bo79]

G. Boolos, The Unprovability of Consistency: An Essay on Modal Logic Cambridge
University Press, 1979.
[BS76] A. Bezboruah and J. Shepherdsun, Godel's Second Incompleteness Theorem for Q,
Journal of Symbolic LogiJ 41 (1976) pp. 503-512.
['Bu85] S. Buss, Polynomial Hierarchy and Fr_agments of Bounded, Proceedings of 17th
Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing (1985) pp. 285-290
[Bu86] S. Buss, Bounded Arithmetic, Princeton Ph.D. dissertation published- in Proof
Theory Lecture Notes #3 by Bibliopolic (1986), see also [Bug5].
[Bu93] S. Buss, private communications.
[En72] H, Enderton A Mathematical Introduction to Logic Academic Press 1972.
[Fe60] S. Feferman, Arithmetization of Metamathematics in a General Setting, Fundamenta Mathematicae 49 (1960) pp. 35-92.
[Fe88] S. Feferman, Finitary Inductively Presented Logics, in Proceedings of Logic Colloquium 88, North Holland Publishing House (1989) pp. 191-220.
[Fi90] M. Fitting, First Order Logic and Automated Theorem Proving, Springer Verlag
Monograph in Computer Science, 1990.
[Ge69] G. Gentzen Collected Papers, translated by M.E. Szabo, North Holland, 1969.
[Go31] K. Godel, Uber formal unentscheidbare Satze der Principia Mathematica und
verwandter Systeme, I, Monatsh Math Phys, 38, (1931) pp. 173-198.
[HB39] D. Hilbert and B. Bernays, Grundlager der Mathematik Volume 1 (1934) and
Volume 2 (1939), Springer.
[Je71] R. Jeroslow, Consistency Statements in Formal Mathematics, Fundamentae
Mathematicae 51 (1971) pp. 17-40.
[Kr71] G. Kriesel, A Survey of Proof Theory, Part I in Journal of Symbolic Logic 33
(1968) pp. 321-388 (see e~ecially footnote 8 and page 349); Part H in Proceedings
of SecoKd Scandinavian Logic S~mposium (1971) North Holland Press (with Fenstad ed.), Amsterdam (see especially pp. l17(d) & 166).
[KT74] G. Kriesel and G. Takeuti, Formally self-referential propositions for cut-free classical analysis and related systems, Dtssertations Mathematica 118, 1974 pp. 1 -55.
[LO55] M. Lob, Solution of a Problem of Leon Henkin, Journal of Symbolic Logic 20
(1955) pp. 115-118.
[Me87] E. Mendelson, Introduction to Mathematical Logic, Wadsworth & Brooks/Cole
Mathematics Series, 1987.
[Ro67] H. Rogers, Theory of Recursive Functions and Effective Compatibility, McGraw
Hill 19-67,see especiaqly pp. 186-188.
[Sc83] H. Schwichteberg, Proof Theory: Some Applications of Cut Elimination, in Handbook on Mathematical Logic, North Holland Publishing House (1983) pp. 867-896.
[St83] R. Statman, Herbrand's theorem and Gentzen's Notion of a Direct Proof, in Handbook on Mathematical LOgic, North Holland Publishing House (1983) pp. 897-913.
[Sm61] R. Smullyan, The Theory of Formal Systems, Princeton University Press, 1961.
[Sm68] R. Smullyan, First Order Logic, Springer-Verlag, 1968.
[Sm83] C. Smorynski, The Incompleteness Theorem Handbook on Mathematical Logic, pp.
821-866, 1983.
[Ta53] G. Takeuti, On a Generalized Logical Calculus, Japan Journal on Mathematics 23
(1953) pp. 39-96.
[Ta87] G. Takeuti, Proof Theory, Studies in Logic Volume 81, North Holland, 1987.
[Wi90] D. Willard, Quasi-Linear Algorithms for Processinl~ Relational Calculus Expressions, Proc o~'A.CM s PODS-7990 Conf, pp 243-25T. This reference may be helpful as an optimization technique to help render an efficient computer implementation of IS. (Much further optiriaization will clearly be greatly nee~d.)
[Wi93] D. WiUard, Self-Verifying Axiom Systems and their Implications, (the unabrideged
version of the present article), SUNY-Albany Tech Report, 1993.

