On the Broader Epistemological Significance of
Self-Justifying Axiom Systems
Dan E.Willard
University at Albany Computer Science and Mathematics Departments

Abstract. This article will be a continuation of our research into selfjustifying systems. It will introduce several new theorems (one of which
will transform our previous infinite-sized self-verifying logics into formalisms or purely finite size). It will explain how self-justification is useful, even when the Incompleteness Theorem clearly limits its scope.

Citation Information: The manuscript here is almost identical to the article
appearing in pp. 221-236 of Springer LNCS 8652 except that I replaced the
prior 2-sentence excessively abbreviated quotation ∗∗ from Hilbert (1926) with
a more detailed 4-sentence quotation in the new Item ∗∗ (that makes the same
point only more forcefully). Other than this minor change, the only significant
difference between these two manuscripts is simply that I use a broader line
spacing in the current manuscript to make it easier to read.

1

Introduction

Gödel’s Incompleteness Theorem has two parts. Its first half indicates no decision procedure can identify arithmetic’s true statements. Its “Second Incompleteness” result specifies sufficiently strong logics cannot verify their own consistency. Gödel was careful to insert a caveat into his historic paper [11], indicating
a diluted form of Hilbert’s Consistency Program might have some success:
∗ “It must be expressly noted Proposition XI represents no contradiction
of the formalistic standpoint of Hilbert. For this standpoint presupposes
only the existence of a consistency proof by finite means, and there might
conceivably be finite proofs which cannot be stated in P or in ...”
Some scholars have interpreted ∗ as, possibly, anticipating attempts to confirm
Peano Arithmetic’s consistency, via either Gentzen’s formalism or Gödel’s Dialectica interpretation. On the other hand, the Stanford Encyclopedia’s entry

about Gödel quotes him, in its Section 2.2.4, stating he was hesitant to view the
Second Incompleteness Theorem as fully ubiquitous, until learning of Turing’s
work. Moreover, Yourgrau [45] states von Neumann “argued against Gödel himself ” in the early 1930’s, about the definitive termination of Hilbert’s consistency
program, which “for several years” after [11]’s publication, Gödel “was cautious
not to prejudge”. Also, it is known [6, 13, 45] that Gödel did initially presume
the second theorem was false, before proving its stunning result.
In any case some years after he wrote ∗’s initial statement, Gödel gave a 1933
lecture [12], where he told his audience that Hilbert’s initial 1926 objectives,
summarized formally by ∗∗ below, had “unfortunately” no “hope of succeeding
along” its originally intended plans.
∗∗

(Hilbert [17] 1926): “ Let us admit that the situation in which

we presently find ourselves with respect to paradoxes is in the long run
intolerable. Just think: in mathematics, this paragon of reliability and
truth, the very notions and inferences, as everyone learns, teaches, and
uses them, lead to absurdities. And where else would reliability and truth
be found if even mathematical thinking fails?” (It is evident that Hilbert
is advocating in this 3-sentence passage a version of his Consistency
Program that modern mathematicians consider over-simplistic in light
of the strength of the Second Incompleteness Theorem. This is because
Item 2 of Hilbert’s next paragraph is clearly making an excessive promise
when it attaches no reservation to its declaration that: “It is necessary to
make inferences everywhere as reliable as they are in ordinary elementary
number theory, which no one questions and in which contradictions and
paradoxes arise only through our carelessness” .)
Our research, in both the current article and prior papers [35–44], was stimulated by the prospect that we find ∗∗ enticing, even though the Second Incompleteness Theorem unequivocally demonstrates that logics cannot recognize their
own consistency in a robust sense. Accordingly, we have studied both generalizations and boundary-case exceptions for the Second Incompleteness Theorem in
[35–44]. The current article will seek to both strengthen these prior results, in the
context of axiom systems with strictly finite cardinalities, and to also provide a
more intuitive explanation of the meaning behind [35–44]’s results.
2

The thesis of this article will be delicate because there can be no doubt
that the Second Incompleteness Theorem is sharply robust, when viewed from a
conventional purist mathematical perspective. On the other hand, we will argue
that there are certain facets of a “Self-Justifying Logics”, that are tempting under
a hard-nosed engineering perspective, contemplating sharply curtailed forms of
Hilbert’s goals. These results will be fragile but not fully immaterial.

2

Background Setting

Let (α, d) denote any axiom system and deduction method satisfying the simple
“Split Rule” below 1 . This pair will be called “Self Justifying” when:
i one of α ’s theorems will state that the deduction method d, applied to the
system α, will produce a consistent set of theorems, and
ii the axiom system α is in fact consistent.
For any (α, d) , it is easy to construct a second αd ⊇ α that satisfies the Part-i
requirement. For instance, αd could consist of all of α ’s axioms plus an added
“SelfRef(α, d)” sentence, defined as stating:
• There is no proof (using d’s deduction method) of 0 = 1 from the union
of the system α with this sentence “SelfRef(α, d)” (looking at itself).
Kleene [20] noted how to encode rough analogs of “SelfRef(α, d)”. Each of Kleene,
Rogers and Jeroslow [20, 29, 19] noted αd may, however, be inconsistent (despite
SelfRef(α, d)’s assertion), thus causing it to violate Part-ii’s requirement.
This problem arises in many contexts besides Gödel’s paradigm, where α was
an extension of Peano Arithmetic (see [1–5, 7, 9, 11, 14–16, 18, 21–23, 25–34, 38,
39, 43]). Such results formalize paradigms where self-justification is infeasible,
due to diagonalization issues. (It should, perhaps, be added that among this
lengthy list of articles, it was especially [1, 4, 11, 23, 27, 31, 34]’s incompleteness
results that influenced our work in [35–44].) In any case, the main point is
that most logicians have hesitated to employ an analog of a SelfRef(α, d) axiom
because αd = α+SelfRef(α, d) is typically inconsistent.
1

Our “Split Rule” is the trivial requirement that all the axiom sentences in α are
technically proper axioms, and that deduction method d is required to include
BOTH a finite number of rules of inference and whatever “logical axioms” are
needed (if any ? ) by d’s methodology. (This trivial notation convention is helpful.)

3

Our research in [35, 37, 40, 42, 41] focused on paradigms where self-justification
is feasible. It involved weakening the properties a logic can prove about addition and/or multiplication (to avoid potential difficulties). To be more precise,
let Add(x, y, z) and M ult(x, y, z) denote 3-way predicates specifying x + y = z
and x ∗ y = z. Then a logic will be said to recognize successor, addition and
multiplication as Total Functions iff it includes sentences 1-3 as axioms.
∀x ∃z Add(x, 1, z)
∀x ∀y ∃z Add(x, y, z)
∀x ∀y ∃z M ult(x, y, z)

(1)
(2)
(3)

A logic α will be called Type-M iff it contains 1-3 as axioms, Type-A iff
it contains only (1) and (2) as axioms, Type-S iff it contains only (1) as an
axiom, and Type-NS iff it contains none of these axioms. The relationship of
these constructs to self-justification is explained by items (a) and (b):
a. The existence of Type-A systems that can recognize their own consistency
under semantic tableaux deduction, while proving analogs of all Peano Arithmetic’s Π1 theorems (in a slightly different language), was demonstrated in
[40]. Also, [37, 41] noted that some specialized forms of Type-NS systems
can likewise recognize their own Hilbert consistency.
b. The above evasions of the Second Incompleteness Theorem are known to
be near-maximal in a mathematical sense. This is because the combined
work of Pudlák, Solovay, Nelson and Wilkie-Paris [24, 27, 31, 34] implied no
natural Type-S system can recognize its Hilbert consistency, and Willard
subsequently [38, 43, 44] hybridized their formalisms with some techniques
of Adamowicz-Zbierski [1, 2] to establish that most Type-M systems cannot
recognize their own semantic tableaux consistency.
Other fascinating efforts to evade the Second Incompleteness Theorem have
used the Kreisel-Takeuti “CFA” system [22] or the the interpretational framework of Friedman, Nelson, Pudlák and Visser [10, 24, 27, 33]. These systems are
unrelated to our approach because they do not use Kleene-like “I am consistent”
axiom-sentences. Instead, CFA uses the special properties of “second order” generalizations of Gentzen’s cut-free Sequent Calculus, and the interpretational approach formalizes how some systems recognize their Herbrand consistency on
localized sets of integers, which unbeknown to themselves, includes all integers.
(These alternate results are interesting but unrelated to our approach.)
4

3

Defining Notation and Earlier Results

A function F will be called Non-Growth iff F (a1 ...aj ) ≤ M aximum(a1 ...aj )
holds. Six examples of non-growth functions are Integer Subtraction (where x−y
is defined to equal zero when x ≤ y ),

Integer Division (where x ÷ y equals x

when y = 0, and it equals b x/y c otherwise), M aximum(x, y), Logarithm(x)
Root(x, y) = d x1/y e and Count(x, j) designating the number of “1” bits among
x’s rightmost j bits. The term U-Grounding Function referred in [40] to a set
of primitives, which included the preceding functions plus the growth operations
of addition and Double(x) = x + x. Our language L∗ was built out of these
symbols, plus the primitives of “0”, “1”, “ = ” and “ ≤ ”.
In a context where t is any term in [40]’s language L∗ , the quantifiers in
the wffs ∀ v ≤ t Ψ (v) and ∃ v ≤ t Ψ (v) were called bounded quantifiers. Any
formula in L∗ , all of whose quantifiers are bounded, was called a ∆∗0 formula.
The Πn∗ and Σn∗ formulae were then defined by the usual rules that:
1. Every ∆∗0 formula is considered to be “ Π0∗ ” and also “ Σ0∗ ”.
∗
2. A wff is called Πn∗ when it is encoded as ∀v1 ... ∀vk Φ with Φ being Σn−1
∗
3. Also, a wff is called Σn∗ when it is encoded as ∃v1 ..∃vk Φ, where Φ is Πn−1
.

Our article [40] used the symbol D to denote a deduction method. In addition to using Fitting’s version of semantic tableaux methodology [8], it defined
an alternative, called Tab-k deduction, that consisted of a speeded-up version
of a tableaux, which permitted a limited analog of Gentzen-style deductive cuts
for Πk∗ and Σk∗ formulae.
Thus, if H denotes a sequence of ordered pairs (t1 , p1 ), (t2 , p2 ), ... (tn , pn ),
where pi is a Semantic Tableaux proof of the theorem ti , then H was called
a “Tab-k Proof ” of a theorem T from α’s axioms iff T = tn and also:
1. Each of the “intermediately derived theorems” t1 , t2 , ... , tn−1 have a complexity no greater than that of either a Πk∗ or Σk∗ sentence.
2. Each axiom in pi ’s proof either comes from α or is one of t1 , t2 , ... , ti−1 .
Let us say an axiom system α has a Level-J Understanding of its own
consistency under a deduction method D iff α can prove that there exists no
proofs using its axioms and D’s deduction of both a ΠJ∗ theorem and its negation.
In this notation, items A and B summarize [36, 38–40, 43]’s main results:
5

A. For any axiom system A using L∗ ’s U-Grounding language, [40] showed
its ISD (A) formalism could prove all A’s Π1∗ theorems and simultaneously
verify its Level-1 consistency under Tab−1 deduction.
B. Two negative results, tightly complementing item A’s positive result, were
exhibited in [36, 38, 39, 43]. The first was that [36, 38, 43] showed most systems are unable to verify their Level-0 consistency under semantic tableaux
deduction, when they included statement (3)’s “Type-M” axiom that multiplication is a total function. Moreover, [39] offered an alternate form of this
incompleteness result, showing statement (2)’s far weaker Type-A systems
cannot verify their Level-0 consistency under Tab−2 deduction.
The contrast between these positive and negative results had led to our conjecture that automated theorem provers are likely to eventually achieve a fragmentary part of the ambitions that were suggested by Hilbert in ∗∗ . This is
because the question of whether a formalism can support an idealized Utopian
conception of its own consistency is different from exploring the degrees to which
theorem-provers can possess a fragmentary knowledge of their own consistency.
The Incompleteness Theorem has demonstrated an Utopian idealized form of
self-justification is unobtainable, but our research has found some diluted cousins
of this construct that are feasible

4

The ISD (A) Axiom System

In a context where A denotes any axiom system using L∗ ’s U-Grounding
language, ISD (A) was defined in [40] to be an axiomatic formalism capable of
recognizing all of A’s Π1∗ theorems and corroborating its own Level-1 consistency
under D’s deductive method. It consisted of the following four groups of axioms:
Group-Zero: Two of the Group-zero axioms will define the constant-symbols,
c̄0 and c̄1 , designating the integers of 0 and 1. The Group-zero axioms will
also define the growth functions of addition and Double(x) = x + x. The
net effect of these axioms will be to set up a machinery to define any integer
n ≥ 2 using fewer than 3 · d Log n e logic symbols.
Group-1: This axiom group will consist of a finite set of Π1∗ sentences, denoted
as F , which can prove any ∆∗0 sentence that holds true under the standard
6

model of the natural numbers. (Any finite set of Π1∗ sentences F with this
property may be used to define Group-1, as [40] noted.)
Group-2: Let pΦq denote Φ’s Gödel Number, and HilbPrfA (pΦq, p) denote a
∆∗0 formula indicating p is a Hilbert-styled proof of theorem Φ from
axiom system A. For each Π1∗ sentence Φ, the Group-2 schema will contain
an axiom of form (4). (Thus ISD (A) can trivially prove all A’s Π1∗ theorems.)
∀p

{ HilbPrfA (pΦq, p) ⇒ Φ }

(4)

Group-3: The final part of the ISD (A) will be a self-referencing Π1∗ axiom,
indicating ISD (A) meets §3’s criteria of being “Level-1 consistent” under
deductive method D. It is, thus, the following declaration:
# No two proofs exist for a Π1∗ sentence and its negation, when D’s
deductive method is applied to an axiom system, consisting of the
union of Groups 0, 1 and 2 with this sentence (looking at itself ).
One encoding of #, as a self-referencing Π1∗ axiom, appears in [40]. Thus,
(5) is a Π1∗ styled encoding for # when:

1)

Prf ISD (A) (a, b) is a ∆∗0

formula indicating that b is a proof of a theorem a under ISD (A)’s axiom
system and D’s deduction method,

and

2) Pair(x, y) is a ∆∗0 formula

indicating that x is a Π1∗ sentence and that y represents x ’s negation.
∀x∀y∀p∀q

¬ [ Pair(x, y) ∧ Prf ISD (A) (x, p) ∧ Prf ISD (A) (y, q) ] (5)

Notation. An operation I( • ) that maps an initial axiom system A onto
an alternate system I(A) will be called Consistency Preserving iff I(A) is
consistent whenever all of A’s axioms hold true under the standard model of the
natural numbers. In this context, [40] demonstrated:
Theorem 1. Suppose the symbol D denotes either semantic tableaux deduction
or its Tab−1 generalization. Then the ISD ( • ) mapping operation is consistency
preserving (e.g. ISD (A) will be consistent whenever all of A’s axioms hold true
under the standard model of the natural numbers).
We emphasize the most difficult part of [40]’s result was neither the definition of its ISD (A)’s axiom system nor the Π1∗ fixed-point encoding of (5)’s
Group-3 axiom. Instead, the key challenge was the confirming of Theorem 1’s
“Consistency Preservation” property.
7

The confirming of this property is subtle because its invariant breaks down
when D is a deduction method only slightly stronger than either semantic
tableaux or Tab−1 deduction. Thus, Pudlák’s and Solovay’s work [27, 31] implies
Theorem 1’s analog fails when D represents Hilbert deduction, and [39] showed
its generalization fails even when D represents Tab−2 deduction.

5

A Finitized Generalization of Theorem 1’s Methodology

One difficulty with ISD (A) is that it employs an infinite number of different
incarnations of sentence (4) in its Group-2 scheme (since it contains one incarnation of this sentence for each Π1∗ sentence Φ in L∗ ’s language). Such a
Group-2 schema is awkward because it simulates A’s Π1∗ knowledge almost via
a brute-force enumeration.
Our Definition 1 and Theorems 2 and 3 will show how to mostly overcome
this problem by compressing the infinite number of instances of sentence (4) in
ISD (A)’s Group-2 schema into a purely finite structure.
Definition 1. Let β denote any finite set of axioms that have Π1∗ encodings.
Then IS#
D (β) will denote an axiom system, similar to ISD (A), except its Group-2
scheme will employ β ’s set of axioms, instead of using an infinite number of
applications of statement (4)’s scheme. (Thus, the “I am consistent” statement
in IS#
D (β)’s Group-3 axiom will be the same as before, except that the “I am”
fragment of its self-referencing statement will reflect these changes in Group-2
in the obvious manner.)
Theorem 2. Let D again denote either semantic tableaux or Tab−1 deduction,
and β again denote a set of Π1∗ axioms. Then IS#
D (β) will be consistent whenever
all β’s axioms hold true under the standard model. (In other words, IS#
D (β) will
satisfy an analog of Theorem 1’s consistency preservation property for ISD (A).)
Theorem 2’s proof is almost identical to [40]’s proof of Theorem 1. It will. not
be repeated in this extended abstract. Instead, this section will apply Theorem 2
to show how finite-sized self-justifying logics can provide an infinite amount
of “kernelized” Π1∗ information.

8

Definition 2. Let Testi (t, x) denote any ∆∗0 formula, and pΨ q denote Ψ ’s
Gödel number. Then Testi (t, x) will be called a Kernelized Formula iff Peano
Arithmetic can prove every Π1∗ sentence Ψ satisfies (6)’s identity:
Ψ

⇐⇒

∀ x Testi ( p Ψ q , x )

(6)

There are infinitely many ∆∗0 predicates Test1 (t, x), Test2 (t, x), Test3 (t, x) ...
satisfying this kernelized condition (one of which is illustrated by Example 1).
An enumerated list of all the available kernels is called a Kernel-List.
Example 1. The set of true Σ1∗ sentences is r.e. This implies there exists a ∆∗0
formula, called say Probe(g, x), such that g is the Gödel number of a Σ1∗
statement that holds true in the Standard Model iff (7) is true:
∃x

Probe(g, x) ∧ x ≥ g

(7)

Now, let Pair(t, g) denote a ∆∗0 formula that specifies t is the Gödel number
of a Π1∗ statement and g is the Σ1∗ formula which is its negation. Then our
notation implies that t is a true Π1∗ statement if and only if (8) holds true:
∀x ¬[∃g ≤ x

Pair(t, g) ∧ Probe(g, x) ]

(8)

Thus if Test0 (t, x) denotes the ∆∗0 formula of ¬ [ ∃ g ≤ x Pair(t, g) ∧ Probe(g, x)],
it is one example of what Definition 2 would call a “Kernelized Formula”.
Definition 3. Let us recall Definition 2 defined Kernel-List to be an enumeration of all the kernelized formulae Test1 (t, x), Test2 (t, x), Test3 (t, x)... . Assuming
Testi (t, x) is the i−th element in this list and Ψ is an arbitrary Π1∗ sentence,
Ψ ’s i-th Kernel Image will be defined as the following Π1∗ sentence:
∀ x Test i ( p Ψ q , x )

(9)

Example 2. The Definitions 2 and 3 suggest that there is a subtle relationship
between a sentence Ψ and its i−th Kernel Image. This is because Definition 2
indicates that Peano Arithmetic can prove the invariant (6), indicating that Ψ
is equivalent to its i−th Kernel Image. However, a weak axiom system can be
plausibly uncertain about whether this equivalence holds.
Thus if a weak axiom system proves statement (9) (rather than Ψ ), it may
not be able to equate these results. This problem will apply to Theorem 3’s
9

formalism. However, Theorem 3 will be still of much interest because §6 will
illustrate a methodology that overcomes many of Theorem 3’s limitations.
Theorem 3. Let A denote any system, whose axioms hold true in arithmetic’s
standard model, and i denote the index of any of Definition 2’s kernelized
formulae Testi (t, x). Then it is possible to construct a finite-sized collection of
Π1∗ sentences, called say βA,i , where IS#
D (βA,i ) satisfies the following invariant:
If Ψ is one of the Π1∗ theorems of A then IS#
D (βA,i ) can prove (9)’s
statement (e.g. it will prove the “the i−th kernelized image” of Ψ ).
Proof Sketch: Our justification of Theorem 3 will use the following notation:
1. Check(t) will denote a ∆∗0 formula that produces a Boolean value of “True”
when t represents the Gödel number of a Π1∗ sentence.
2. HilbPrfA (t, q) will denote a ∆∗0 formula that indicates q is a Hilbert-style
proof of the theorem t from axiom system A .
3. For any kernelized Testi (t, x) formula, GlobSimi will denote (10)’s Π1∗ sentence. (It will be called A’s i−th “Global Simulation Sentence”.)
∀ t ∀ q ∀ x { [ HilbPrfA (t, q) ∧ Check(t) ]

=⇒

Testi (t, x) } (10)

In this notation, the requirements of Theorem 3 will be satisfied by any
version of the axiom system IS#
D (β), whose Group-2 schema β is a finite sized
consistent set of Π1∗ sentences that has (10) as an axiom. (This includes the
minimal sized such system, that has only (10) as an axiom.) This is because if
Ψ is any Π1∗ theorem of A, whose proof is denoted as p̄ , then both the ∆∗0
predicates of HilbPrfA (pΨ q, p̄) and Check(pΨ q) are true. Moreover, IS#
D (β)’s
Group-1 axiom subgroup was defined so that it can automatically prove all ∆∗0
sentences that are true. Thus, IS#
D (β) will prove these two statements and hence
corroborate (via axiom (10)) the further statement:
∀ x Test i ( pΨ q , x )

(11)

Hence for each of the infinite number of Π1∗ theorems that A proves, the above
defined formalism will prove a matching statement that corresponds to the i−th
kernelized image of each such proven theorem.
10



6

L-Fold Generalizations of Theorem 3

Theorem 3 is of interest because every axiom system A will have its formalism
∗
IS#
D (βA,i ) prove the i−th kernelized image of every Π1 theorem that A proves.

This fact is helpful because (6)’s invariance holds for all Π1∗ sentences. Moreover,
our “U-Grounded” Π1∗ sentences capture all Conventional Arithmetic’s crucial
Π1 information because they can view multiplication as a 3-way ∆∗0 predicate
Mult(x, y, z) via (12)’s encoding of this predicate.
[ (x = 0∨y = 0) ⇒ z = 0 ] ∧ [ (x 6= 0∧y 6= 0 ) ⇒ (

z
z−1
=y∧
< y ) ] (12)
x
x

#
One difficulty with IS#
D (β) and ISD (βA,i ) was mentioned by Example 2. It

was that while Peano Arithmetic can corroborate (6)’s invariance for every Π1∗
sentence Ψ , these latter systems cannot also do so.
While there will probably never be a perfect method for fully resolving this
challenge, there is a pragmatic engineering-style solution that is often available.
This is essentially because our proof of Theorem 3 employed a formalism β
that used essentially only one axiom sentence (e.g. (10)’s Π1∗ declaration ).
Since the IS#
D (β) formalism was intended for use by any finite-sized system β,
it is clearly possible to include any finite number of formally true Π1∗ sentences in
β. Thus for some fixed constant L, one can easily let β include L copies of (10)’s
axiom framework for a finite number of different Test1 , Test2 ... TestL predicates,
each of which satisfy Definition 2’s criteria for being kernelized formulae. In this
∗
case, IS#
D (β) will formally map each initial Π1 theorem Ψ of some axiom system

A onto L resulting different Π1∗ theorems of the form (9).
Remark 1. Our basic conjecture is, essentially, that a goodly number of issues,
concerning logic-based engineering applications called say E, may have convenient solutions via self-justifying logics, that follow the preceding outlined L-fold
strategy. Thus, we are suggesting that if β is a large-but-finite set of axioms,
that consists of L copies of (10)’s axiom framework for different Test1 ...TestL
predicates, then some future engineering applications E may possibly have
their needs met by an IS#
D (β) formalisms, when a software engineer meticulously
chooses an appropriately constructed finite-sized β.
Remark 2. The preceding was not meant to overlook that the Second Incompleteness Theorem is a robust result, applying to all logics of sufficient strength.
11

Our suggestion, however, is that computers are becoming so powerful, in both
speed and memory size as the 21st century is progressing, that there will likely
emerge engineering-style applications E that will benefit from IS#
D (β)’s selfreferencing formalisms when a large-but-finite-sized β is delicately chosen. Moreover, it is of interest to speculate whether such computers can partially imitate
a human being’s approximate instinctive conjectures about his own consistency
(that, as common colloquially held conjectures, seem to serve as essential prerequisites for humans to gain their motivation to cogitate).
Sections 7-9 will examine the preceding issues in further detail. One of their
themes will be that our exceptions to Gödel’s second theorem, while sometimes
nontrivial, clearly do not narrow the main intentions of Gödel’s result.

7

Comparing Type-M and Type-A Formalisms

Let us recall axioms (1)-(3) indicated Type-A systems differ from Type−M formalisms by treating Multiplication as a 3-way relation (rather than as a total
function). For the sake of accurately characterizing what our systems can and
cannot do, we have described our results as being fringe-like exceptions to the
Second Incompleteness Theorem, from the perspective of an Utopian view of
Mathematics, while perhaps being more significant results from an engineeringstyle perspective of knowledge. Our goal in this section will be to amplify upon
this perspective by taking a closer look at Type-A and Type-M formalisms.
Let us assume that x0 = 2 = y0 and that x1 , x2 , x3 , ... and y1 , y2 , y3 , ... are
defined by the recurrence rules of:
xi+1 = xi + xi

AND

yi+1 = yi ∗ yi

(13)

The sequences x0 , x1 , x2 , ... and y0 , y1 , y2 , ... will thus represent the growth rates
associated with the addition and multiplication primitives, lying in the statements (2) and (3)’s “Type-A” and “Type-M” axioms.
n

Since x0 = 2 = y0 , the rule (13) implies yn = 22

and xn = 2n+1 . The

y0 , y1 , y2 , ... sequence will, thus, grow much more quickly than the x0 , x1 , x2 , ...
sequence (since yn ’s binary encoding will have an Log(yn ) = 2n length while
xn ’s binary encoding will have a shorter length = Log(xn ) = n + 1 ).
12

Our prior papers noted that the difference between these growth rates was the
reason that [36, 38, 43] showed all natural Type-M systems, recognizing integermultiplication as a total function, were unable to recognize their tableaux-styled
consistency — while [35, 37, 40] showed some Type-A systems could simultaneously prove all Peano Arithmetic Π1∗ theorems and corroborate their own
tableaux consistency. Their gist was that a Gödel-like diagonalization argument,
which causes an axiom system to become inconsistent as soon as it proves a
theorem affirming its own tableaux consistency, stems, ultimately, from the exponential growth in the series y0 , y1 , y2 , ... .
This growth, thus, facilitates an intense amount of self-referencing, using the
identity Log(yn ) ∼
= 2n , that will, ultimately, invoke the force of Gödel’s seminal
diagonalization machinery. It thus raises raises the following question:
∗∗∗ How natural are exponentially growing sequences, such as y0 , y1 , y2 ..,
whose n−th member needs 2n bits for its encoding, when such lengths
are greater than the number of atoms in the universe when merely
n > 100 ? Is such a sequence’s use, for corroborating the Second Incompleteness Effect, an inherently artificial construct ?
We will not attempt to derive a Yes-or-No answer to Question ∗ ∗ ∗ because
it is one of those epistemological questions that can be debated endlessly. Our
point is that ∗ ∗ ∗ probably does not require a definitive positive or negative
answer because both perspectives are useful. Thus, the theoretical existence of
a sequence of integers of y0 , y1 , y2 , ..., whose binary encodings are doubling in
length, is tempting from the perspective of an Utopian view of mathematics,
while awkward from an engineering styled perspective. We therefore ask: “Why
not be tolerant of both perspectives? ”
One virtue of this tolerance is it ushers in a greater understanding for the
statements ∗ and ∗∗ that Gödel and Hilbert made during 1926 and 1931. This
is because the Incompleteness Theorem demonstrates no formalism can display
an understanding of its own consistency in an idealized Utopian sense. On the
other hand, §6 suggested these remarks by Gödel and Hilbert might receive more
sympathetic interpretations, if one sought to explore such questions from a less
ambitious almost engineering-style perspective.
Our main thesis is supported by a theorem from [42]. It indicated that
tableaux variations of self-justifying systems have no difficulty in recognizing
13

that an infinitized generalization of a computer’s floating point multiplication
(with rounding) is a total function. The latter differs from integer-multiplication,
by not having its output become double the length of its input when a number is multiplied by itself. Thus, the intuitive reason [42]’s multiplication-withrounding operation is compatible with self-justification is because it avoids the
inexorable exponential growth under rule (13)’s sequence y0 , y1 , y2 .. .
Also, Theorem 4 indicates self-justifying logics can view a double-precision
form of integer multiplication as likewise a total function. Its proof, exactly
analogous to [42]’s methodology, will appear in a longer version of this paper.
Theorem 4. Let us assume the A in ISD (A) and IS#
D (βA,i ) represents Peano
Arithmetic. Then ISD (A) and IS#
D (βA,i ) can formalize two total functions, called
Left(a, b) and Right(a, b), where any pair of integers (a, b) is mapped onto the left
and right halves of a and b’s multiplicative product.
Remark 3. One slightly tricky aspect is that our positive results, involving [42]’s
floating point multiplication and Theorem 4’s double precision multiplication,
should not be confused with a different examination of Herbrandized consistency
in [44]. The latter took advantage of the fact that our Herbrand-styled proofs, in
[44]’s paradigm, are exponentially longer than their tableaux counterparts, thus
allowing [44] to formalize a limited use of multiplication (because its deductive
methods was exponentially less efficient). Thus [44]’s results, while perhaps theoretically interesting, are basically irrelevant to engineering environments, e.g.
the main concern of Theorems 1–4 (especially in regards to their particular interpretations given in Remark 2).

8

A Different Type of Evidence Supporting Our Thesis

Let us recall Pudlák and Solovay [27, 31] observed that essentially all TypeS systems, containing merely statement (1)’s axiom that successor is a total
function, cannot verify their own consistency under Hilbert deduction. (See also
related work by Buss-Ignjatovic [5], Švejdar [32] and the Appendix A of [37])
It turns out that [39] generalized these results to show that Equation (2)’s
Type-A systems are unable to verify their own consistency, under the Tab−2
deduction (defined in §3). At the same time, the ISD and IS#
D frameworks, from
14

Sections 4 and 5, can verify their own consistency under Tab−1 deduction. Our
goal in this section will be to illustrate how the tight contrast between these
positive and negative results is analogous to the differing growth rates of the
sequences x0 , x1 , x2 , ... and y0 , y1 , y2 , ... from rule (13).
During our discussion Gi (v) will denote the scalar-multiplication operation
i

that maps an integer v onto 22 · v . Also, Υi will denote the statement, in
the U-Grounding language, that declares that Gi is a total function. Our paper
[39] proved that Υi has a Π2∗ encoding. It is also implied that Gi satisfied:
Gi+1 (v)

=

Gi ( Gi (v) )

(14)

It was noted in [39] that this identity implies one can construct an axiom system
β, comprised of solely Π1∗ sentences, where a semantic tableaux proof can establish Υi+1 from β + Υi in a constant number of steps. This implies, in turn, that a
Tab−2 proof from β will require no more that O(n) steps to prove Υn (when it
uses the obvious n-step process to confirm in chronological order Υ1 , Υ2 , ...Υn . )
n

These observations are significant because Gn (1) = 22 . Thus, [39] showed a
Tab−2 proof from β can verify in O(n) steps that this integer exists.
This example is helpful because it illustrates the difference between the
growth speeds under Tab−1 and Tab−2 deduction, is analogous to the differing growth rates of the sequences x0 , x1 , x2 , ... and y0 , y1 , y2 , ... from rule (13).
Hence once again, a faster growth-rate will usher in the Second Incompleteness
Theorem’s power (e.g. see [39]).
This analogy suggests that the Second Incompleteness Theorem has different
implications from the perspectives of Utopian and engineering theories about
the intended applications of mathematics. Thus, a Utopian may possibly be
comfortable with a perspective, that contemplates sequences y0 , y1 , y2 , ... with
elements growing in length at an exponential speed, but many engineers may be
suspicious of such growths.
A hard-core engineer, in contrast, might surmise that the inability of selfjustifying formalisms to be compatible with Tab−2 deduction is not as disturbing
as it might initially appear to be. This is because Tab−2 differs from Tab−1
deduction by producing exponential growths that are so sharp that their material
realization has no analog in the everyday mechanical reality that is the focus of
an engineer’s interest.
15

Our personal preference is for a perspective lying half-way between that of
an Utopian mathematician and a hard-nosed engineer. Its dualistic approach
suggests some form of diluted partial agreement with Hilbert’s goals in ∗∗.

9

Related Reflection Principles

An added point is that there are many types of self-justifying systems available,
with some better suited for engineering environments than others.
Ideally, one would like to develop self-justifying systems S that could corroborate the validity of (15)’s reflection principle for all sentences Φ.
∀p [ P rfSD (pΦq, p) ⇒ Φ ]

(15)

Löb’s Theorem establishes, however, that all systems S, containing Peano Arithmetic’s strength, are able to prove (15)’s invariant only in the degenerate case
where they prove Φ itself. Also, the Theorem 7.2 from [37] showed essentially all
axiom systems, weaker than Peano Arithmetic, are unable to prove (15) for all
Π1∗ sentences Φ simultaneously. Thus, Theorem 5 will be near optimal:
Theorem 5. For any input axiom system A, it is possible to extend the selfjustifying ISD (A) and IS#
D (βA,i ) systems, from Theorems 1 and 3, so that the
resulting self-justifying logics S can also:
1. Verify that Tab−1 deduction supports the following analog of (15)’s selfreflection principle under S for any ∆∗0 and Σ1∗ sentences Φ :
∀p [ P rfSTab−1 (pΦq, p) ⇒ Φ ]

(16)

2. Verify (17)’s more general “root-diluted” reflection principle for S whenever θ is Σ ∗1 and Φ is a Π2∗ sentence of the form “ ∀u1 ...∀un θ(u1 ...un ) ”.
∀p [ P rfSTab−1 (pΦq, p) =⇒ ∀x ∀u1 <

√

x ... ∀un <

√

x θ(u1 ...un ) ] (17)

Theorem 5’s proof will rest upon hybridizing the techniques from [37]’s tangibility reflection principle with Theorem 3’s methodologies, in a natural manner,
as will be demonstrated in a longer version of this article. Analogous to our other
results, Theorem 5 reinforces the theme about how exceptions to the Second Incompleteness Theorem may appear to be quite minor from the perspective of
an Utopian view of mathematics, while being significant from an engineering
standpoint. In Theorem 5’s particular case, this is because:
16

A. The ability of Theorem 5’s system S to support (16)’s self-reflection principle under Tab−1 proofs for any ∆∗0 and Σ1∗ sentence, as well as to support
(17)’s root reflection principle for Π2∗ sentences, is clearly significant.
B. The incompleteness result of [37]’s Theorem 7.2 imposes, however, sharp
limitations upon Item A’s generality (in that it cannot be extended to fully
all Π1∗ sentences, in an undiluted sense).
Thus, the tight fit between A and B is reminiscent of other slender borderlines,
that separated generalizations and boundary-case exceptions for the Incompleteness Theorem, explored earlier. Once again, the Second Incompleteness Theorem
is seen as robust, from an idealized Utopian perspective on mathematics, while
permitting caveats from engineering styled perspectives.
This dualistic viewpoint allows one to nicely share partial (and not full)
agreement with Hilbert’s main aspirations in ∗∗, while also appreciating the
stunning achievement of the Second Incompleteness Theorem.

10

Concluding Remarks

At a purely technical level, this article has reached beyond our prior papers
in several respects, including §5’s demonstration that any initial system A can
have a kernelized image of its Π1∗ knowledge duplicated by IS#
D (βA,i )’s strictly
finite sized self-justifying system, and also by Section 6’s and Remark 2’s quite
pragmatic L-fold generalizations of this result.
These results help resolve the mystery that has enshrouded the Second Incompleteness Theorem and the statements ∗ and ∗∗ of Gödel and Hilbert. This is
because we have meticulously separated the goals of a pristine theoretical study of
mathematical logic from those of a finite-sized axiomatic subset of mathematics,
intended for modeling mostly an engineering environment.
There is no question that Gödel’s Second Theorem is ideally robust, relative
to a purely pristine approach to mathematics. On the other hand, we suspect
Hilbert was half-way correct by speculating in ∗∗ about humans possessing a
knowledge about their own consistency, in at least some strikingly weak and tender sense, as essentially a fundamental prerequisite for psychologically motivating
their cogitations.
Thus in a context where the limitations of axiom systems, that fail to recognize multiplication as a total function, are manifestly obvious, even when such
17

systems duplicate Peano Arithmetic’s central Π1∗ knowledge, it is legitimate to
inquire whether posterity might find some partial-albeit-not-full redeeming value
in formalisms having weak-style knowledges of their Tab−1 consistency?
More precisely, Sections 5-9 were intended to provide a unified broad-scale
interpretation of our diverse earlier results from [35–44]. In a context where the
Incompleteness Theorem is firmly understood to be sufficiently ubiquitous to
preclude Hilbert’s aspirations in ∗∗ from ever being fully realized, they show
how some fragmentary portion of Hilbert’s conjectures can be corroborated by
judiciously weakened logics, using a formalism, that is much less than ideally
robust, although not fully immaterial.
Acknowledgments: I thank Bradley Armour-Garb and Seth Chaiken for
many useful suggestions about how to improve the presentation of our results.
I also thank the anonymous referees for their comments. This research was partially supported by NSF Grant CCR 0956495.

References
1. Z. Adamowicz. Herbrand consistency and bounded arithmetic. Fundamenta Mathematicae, 171(3):279–292, 2002.
2. Z. Adamowicz and P. Zbierski. On Herbrand consistency in weak theories. Archive
for Mathematical Logic, 40(6):399–413, 2001.
3. A. Bezboruah and J. C. Shepherdson. Gödel’s second incompleteness theorem for
Q. Jour. Symb. Logic, 41(2):503–512, 1976.
4. S. R. Buss. Bounded Arithmetic. Studies in Proof Theory, Lecture Notes 3, published by Bibliopolis, 1986. (Revised version of Ph. D. Thesis.).
5. S. R. Buss and A. Ignjatovic. Unprovability of consistency statements in fragments
of bounded arithmetic. Annals Pure and Applied Logic, 74(3):221–244, 1995.
6. J. W. Dawson. Logical Dilemmas the life and work of Kurt Gödel. AKPeters, 1997.
7. S. Feferman. Arithmetization of metamathematics in a general setting. Fundamenta Mathematicae, 49:35–92, 1960.
8. M. Fitting. First Order Logic and Automated Theorem Proving. Springer, 1996.
9. H. M. Friedman. On the consistency, completeness and correctness problems.
Technical report, Ohio State Univ, 1979. See Pudlák [28]’s summary of this result.
10. H. M. Friedman. Translatability and relative consistency. Technical report, Ohio
State Univ, 1979. See Pudlák [28]’s summary of this result.
11. K. Gödel. Über formal unentscheidbare Sätze der Principia Mathematica und
verwandter Systeme I. Monatshefte für Math. Phys., 38:173–198, 1931.
12. K. Gödel. The present situation in the foundations of mathematics. In S. Feferman, J. W. Dawson, W. Goldfarb, C. Parson, and R. Solovay, editors, Collected
Works Volume III: Unpublished Essays and Lectures, pages 45–53. Oxford University Press, 2004. Our quotes from this 1933 lecture come from its page 52.
13. R. Goldstein. Incompleteness The Proof and Paradox of Kurt Gödel. Norton, 2005.

18

14. P. Hájek. Mathematical fuzzy logic and natural numbers. Fundamenta Mathematicae, 81:155–163, 2007.
15. P. Hájek. Towards metamathematics of weak arithmetics over fuzzy. Logic Journal
of the IPL, 19(3):467–475, 2011.
16. P. Hájek and P. Pudlák. Metamathematics of First Order Arithmetic. Springer
Verlag, 1991.
17. D. Hilbert. Über das Unendliche, published in Mathematische Annalen 95 (1926)
pp. 161-191. Translation by Stefan Bauer-Mengelberg under the title of “On the
Infinite” in “From Frege to Goedel: A Source Book on Mathematical Logic”, edited
by Jean Van Heijenoort and published by Harvard University Press 1967. (The two
passages we quote appear on pages 375 and 376.).
18. D. Hilbert and P. Bernays. Grundlagen der Mathematik (Vol II). Springer, 1939.
19. R. G. Jeroslow. Consistency statements in formal theories. Fundamenta Mathematicae, 72:17–40, 1971.
20. S. C. Kleene. On notation for ordinal numbers. Jour. Symb. Logic, 3(1):150–156,
1938.
21. L. A. Kolodziejczyk. On the Herbrand notion of consistency for finitely axiomatizable fragments of bounded arithmetic theories. Jour. Symb. Logic, 71(2):624–638,
2006.
22. G. Kreisel and G. Takeuti. Formally self-referential propositions in cut-free classical
analysis and related systems. Dissertationes Mathematicae, 118:1–50, 1974.
23. M. H. Löb. A solution of a problem of Leon Henkin. Jour. Symb. Logic, 20(2):115–
118, 1955.
24. E. Nelson. Predicative Arithmetic. Math Notes, Princeton Univ Press, 1986.
25. R. Parikh. Existence and feasibility in arithmetic. Jour. Symb. Logic, 36(3):494–
508, 1971.
26. C. H. Parsons. On n−quantifier induction. Jour. Symb. Logic, 37(3):466–482, 1972.
27. P. Pudlák. Cuts, consistency statements and interpretations. Jour. Symb. Logic,
50(2):423–442, 1985.
28. P. Pudlák. On the lengths of proofs of consistency. In Collegium Logicum: Annals
of the Kurt Gödel, volume 2, pages 65–86. Springer-Wien, 1996.
29. H. A. Rogers. Theory of Recursive Functions and Effective Compatibility. McGraw
Hill, 1967.
30. S. Salehi. Herbrand consistency of some arithmetical theories. Jour. Symb. Logic,
77(3):807–827, 2012.
31. R. M. Solovay. Telephone conversation in 1994 describing Solovay’s generalization
of one of Pudlák’s theorems [27], using some methods of Nelson and Wilkie-Paris
[24, 34]. (The Appendix A of [37] offers a 4-page summary of this conversation.).
32. V. Svejdar. An interpretation of Robinson arithmetic in its Grzegorczjk’s weaker
variant. Fundamenta Mathematicae, 81:347–354, 2007.
33. A. Visser. Faith and falsity. Annals Pure and Applied Logic, 131(1):103–131, 2005.
34. A. J. Wilkie and J. B. Paris. On the scheme of induction for bounded arithmetic.
Annals Pure and Applied Logic, 35:261–302, 1987.
35. D. E. Willard. Self-verifying axiom systems. Springer LNCS, 713:325–336, 1993.
Proceedings of Third Kurt Gödel Symposium.
36. D. E. Willard. The semantic tableaux version of the second incompleteness theorem
extends almost to Robinson’s arithmetic Q. Springer LNCS, 1847:415–430, 2000.
Proceedings of “Tableaux-2000” Conference.
37. D. E. Willard. Self-verifying systems, the incompleteness theorem and the tangibility reflection principle. Jour. Symb. Logic, 66(2):536–596, 2001.

19

38. D. E. Willard. How to extend the semantic tableaux and cut-free versions of the
second incompleteness theorem almost to Robinson’s arithmetic Q. Jour. Symb.
Logic, 67(1):465–496, 2002.
39. D. E. Willard. A version of the second incompleteness theorem for axiom systems
that recognize addition but not multiplication as a total function. In V. Hendricks,
F. Neuhaus, S. A. Pederson, U. Scheffler, and H. Wansing, editors, First Order
Logic Revisited, pages 337–368, Berlin, 2004. Logos Verlag.
40. D. E. Willard. An exploration of the partial respects in which an axiom system
recognizing solely addition as a total function can verify its own consistency. Jour.
Symb. Logic, 70(4):1171–1209, 2005.
41. D. E. Willard. A generalization of the second incompleteness theorem and some
exceptions to it. Annals Pure and Applied Logic, 141(3):472–496, 2006.
42. D. E. Willard. On the available partial respects in which an axiomatization for
real valued arithmetic can recognize its consistency. Jour. Symb. Logic, 71(4):1189–
1199, 2006.
43. D. E. Willard. Passive induction and a solution to a Paris-Wilkie open question.
Annals Pure and Applied Logic, 146(2):124–149, 2007.
44. D. E. Willard. Some specially formulated axiomizations for IΣ0 manage to evade
the Herbrandized version of the second incompleteness theorem. Information and
Computation, 207(10):1078–1093, 2009.
45. P. Yourgrau. A World Without Time: The Forgotten Legacy of Gödel and Einstein.
Basic Books, 2005. See page 58 for the passages we have quoted.

20

