T HE J OURNAL OF S YMBOLIC L OGIC
Volume 00, Number 0, XXX 0000

AN EXPLORATION OF THE PARTIAL RESPECTS IN WHICH AN AXIOM
SYSTEM RECOGNIZING SOLELY ADDITION AS A TOTAL FUNCTION CAN
VERIFY ITS OWN CONSISTENCY

DAN E. WILLARD

Abstract. This article will study a class of deduction systems that allow for a limited use of the modus
ponens method of deduction. We will show that it is possible to devise axiom systems α that can recognize
their consistency under a deduction system D provided that: 1) α treats multiplication as a 3-way relation
(rather than as a total function), and that 2) D does not allow for the use of a modus ponens methodology above
essentially the levels of Π1 and Σ1 formulae.
Part of what will make this boundary-case exception to the Second Incompleteness Theorem interesting is
that we will also characterize generalizations of the Second Incompleteness Theorem that take force when we
only slightly weaken the assumptions of our boundary-case exceptions in any of several further directions.

NOTE TO THE READER:

This paper was pubished in 2005 in the Journal of

Symbolic Logic 70 pp. 1171–1209.
§1. Introduction. Let A(x, y, z) denote a 3-way predicate relation indicating that
x + y = z, and let M (x, y, z) indicate that x ∗ y = z. Let us say an axiom system α
recognizes addition and multiplication as “Total” Functions iff it can prove:
(1)

∀x ∀y ∃z A(x, y, z) AND ∀x ∀y ∃z M (x, y, z)

Section 2 of this article will define a “U-Grounding Language” that formally recognizes
addition as a total function, but treats multiplication as only a 3-way relation. Section
2 will use the terminology Σ∗n and Π∗n to describe the analogs of classical arithmetic’s
Σn and Πn sentences within this U-Grounding language notation. Thus, Section 2’s
Σ∗n and Π∗n sentences will differ from arithmetic’s classic Σn and Πn sentences by
omitting a notational assumption, whose connotation would cause multiplication to be
automatically treated as an implicitly defined total function.
The term K–Deduction will refer to an inference methodology, defined in Section
2, that contains a modus ponens rule for Σ∗K and Π∗K sentences (but not for higher
sentences). The main result of this paper will be that it is feasible to devise a class of
axiom systems for a U-Grounding language that recognize their own self-consistencies
relative to 1–deduction.

c 2005, Association for Symbolic Logic
0022-4812/00/0000-0000/$00.00

1

2

DAN E. WILLARD

Our result about 1–deduction will be near maximal because 1) an accompanying
paper [70] has shown that a 2–deductive analog of our self-justifying formalism is provably infeasible, and because 2) Section 6 will introduce a new negativistic result that
illustrates another direction in which our formalism cannot be further extended.
Moreover our new ISD (A) formalism is stronger than its predecessor, called IS(A)
in [67], and ISD (A)’s associated proof is also significantly simpler.
Underlying Formalism: Some notation is needed to start our discussion. Let α
denote an axiom system and D denote a deduction method. The pair (α, D) will be
called an Introspectively Unified Logic iff
i: one of α ’s formal theorems will state that the deduction method D, applied to
the axiom system α, will produce a consistent set of theorems,
ii: and the axiom system α is in fact consistent.
Also, an axiom system α will be called Self-Justifying iff there exists some frequently
employed deduction method D, such as perhaps the Semantic Tableaux, Hilbert, Herbrand or Sequent-Calculus formalisms, where (α, D) is an Introspectively Unified
Logic.
Kleene’s Fixed Point Theorem implies that every r.e. axiom system α can be easily
extended into a broader system α∗ which satisfies condition (i). For a fixed deduction
method D, Kleene proposed [24] to let α∗ contain all α’s axioms plus one added
axiom sentence stating :
+ There is no proof (using deduction method D ) of a prototypical absurditysentence (such as for example “0=1”) from the union of the axiom system
α with this sentence “+” (looking at itself).
Kleene explained how to apply the Fixed Point Theorem to encode a self-referencing
statement, similar to the axiom (above). However, he pointed out that the catch is that
α∗ may be inconsistent even while its added axiom formally asserts α∗ ’s consistency.
For this reason, Kleene, Rogers and Jeroslow [22, 24, 46] each warned their readers
that most axiom systems, similar to α∗ , were useless on account of their inconsistency,
although they were technically well-defined. In the nomenclature of the previous paragraph, the difficulty is that (α∗ , D) may satisfy Part-i but not the equally important
Part-ii of the definition of introspective unification.
This problem arises in settings considerably more general than Gödel’s original paradigm, where α was an extension of Peano Arithmetic. For instance, Section 4’s
literature survey will discuss a large class of more general settings [1, 2, 3, 4, 7, 9, 14,
20, 23, 37, 38, 40, 41, 42, 43, 49, 52, 53, 57, 58, 64, 68, 70], where sundry variations of
Gödel’s Second Incompleteness Theorem apply to weak axiom systems. Each of these
generalizations of the Second Incompleteness Theorem can be mapped onto a paradigm
where it is impossible to construct a self-justifying formalism (α, D).

AN AXIOM SYSTEM THAT CAN VERIFY ITS OWN CONSISTENCY

3

Our interest in this topic began with the observation that there are certain settings
where it is actually feasible to construct introspectively unified logics (α, D). The two
main examples discussed in our previous work were the particular cases where:
A: The axiom system α recognized addition but not multiplication as a total
function, and D was some cut-free deductive method, such as semantic tableaux
or Herbrand deduction. [67].
B: The system α did not assume that either addition or multiplication was total,
but now D represented Hilbert deduction. (The strongest version of this paradigm appeared in [72], where an “additive naming convention” had replaced the
conventional axiom declaring addition is total.)
Items (A) and (B) naturally raise the question whether it is feasible to hybridize these
effects. One of our results will show that some types of hybridizations are possible,
under a formalism called ISD (A), which recognizes addition as a total function and
uses a deductive method that allows for the application of a modus ponens principle for
Π∗1 and Σ∗1 sentences.
Part of what will make ISD (A) interesting is that there are several generalizations
of Gödel’s Second Incompleteness Theorem, that indicate ISD (A) is difficult to further
improve. Among these generalizations of the Second Incompleteness are the following
phenomena:
1. Pudlák [41] has demonstrated that no extension of axiom system Q [7, 58] can
verify its own Hilbert consistency localized on a definable cut. Solovay [52]
has revised Pudlák’s formalism with some additional techniques of Nelson and
Wilkie-Paris [34, 64] to establish that essentially all axiom systems recognizing
Successor as a total function are unable verify their own Hilbert consistency. (Section 4 will review this prior literature in considerable detail.)
2. We developed in [70] a generalization of Item 1’s result which showed that all
axiom systems recognizing addition as a total function are unable to verify their
2-deductive consistency.
3. Expanding upon some techniques pioneered by Adamowicz, Paris, Pudlák, Solovay, Takeuti, Wilkie and Zbierski in [1, 4, 38, 41, 52, 57, 64], we developed in
[68] a further new result which showed that no natural axiom system can recognize multiplication as total and also verify its cut-free consistency (or “semantic
tableaux” [66] consistency).
4. Section 6 of our current article will describe a close cousin of ISD (A), called
k,m
NSD
(A), that is essentially always inconsistent. This fact will be interesting
k,m
because the only substantial difference between ISD (A) and NSD
(A) will be
the respective manners in which they define the word “this” in the Statement + ’s
Kleene-like axiom.
A detailed review of the prior literature will appear in Section 4. It will explain more
fully exactly how our work is related to the prior literature. Our two new results about

4

DAN E. WILLARD

k,m
ISD (A) and NSD
(A) shall represent a pair of closely matching positive and negative
results. Also, ISD (A) will be significant because it will fill most of the gap that was left
unexplored by results (1)–(4).

In essence, the close match between these positive and negative results will be mathematically significant, regardless of whether or not it is found later to have added significance for epistemology. From a mathematical standpoint, these theorems are useful
because the mixture of their opposing positive and negative results will help characterize
the exact threshold-level where the Second Incompleteness Theorem takes force.
This paper will be divided into three parts. Sections 2 and 3 will summarize our new
results. Section 4 will be a literature survey. Sections 5 and 6 will prove our main new
theorems.
This article is entirely self-contained. It should be comprehensible to most logicians. A researcher who has taken an intensive 2-semester graduate-level course on
logic should probably be able to follow most of the gist of this paper.
§2. Description of Main Results. Let us define a mapping F (a1 , a2 ...aj ) to be a
Non-Growth function iff F (a1 , a2 , ...aj ) ≤ M aximum(a1 , a2 , ...aj ) for all values of
a1 , a2 , ...aj . Six examples of non-growth functions are:
1. Integer Subtraction where x − y is defined to equal zero when x ≤ y,
2. Integer Division where x ÷ y equals x when y = 0, and it equals b x/y c
otherwise,
3. Root(x, y) which equals d x1/y e when y ≥ 1, and it equals x when y = 0.
4. M aximum(x, y),
5. Logarithm(x) = b Log2 (x) c when x ≥ 2, and it equals zero otherwise.
6. Count(x, j) designating the number of “1” bits among x’s rightmost j bits.
These six function are called the Grounding Functions. Also, the term U-Grounding
Function will henceforth refer to a set of functions that includes these six operations
plus the growth functions of addition and Double(x) = x + x.
All our results will use a U-Grounding language. This notation is technically unnecessary — because a system that uses the combination of Equation (2) (which implies addition and doubling are total functions) along with only the first six non-growth
Grounding operations would have properties similar to the U-Grounding language.
(2)

∀x ∀y ∃z x = z − y

However, our notation is much simplified under a language employing function symbols
also for addition and Double(x) = x + x. The virtue of this notation is that it uses
no more than 2 Log2 N appearances of the addition and doubling function symbols
(applied to the input of “1”) to encode every integer N ≥ 2. Such a term will be
called a U-Grounded Binary Representation of N, and it will be denoted as N . For

AN AXIOM SYSTEM THAT CAN VERIFY ITS OWN CONSISTENCY

5

instance, 25 can be encoded as:
(3)

1 + Double( Double( Double( 1 + Double(1) ) ) ).

The use of logic’s conventional notation about Πn and Σm sentences is technically
inappropriate in this paper because the latter notation (with its multiplication function
symbol) is suitable only for axiom systems which recognize multiplication as a total
function. Instead, our analogs for Πn and Σm in the U-Grounding Function language
are called Π∗n and Σ∗m . Here, a term t is defined to be a constant, variable or a
U-Grounding function symbol (whose input arguments are recursively defined terms).
Also, the quantifiers in the wffs ∀ v ≤ t Ψ(v) and ∃ v ≤ t Ψ(v) are called bounded
quantifiers. We will say a formula Φ belongs to the ∆∗0 class if it uses the U-Grounding
primitives as its function symbols, the two relation symbols of “ = ” and “ < ”, and all
its quantifiers are bounded. (Following conventional logic notation, we will sometimes
also use the terms “ Π∗0 ” and “ Σ∗0 ” to designate the ∆∗0 class.) For n ≥ 1, a formula
Υ shall be called Π∗n iff it is written in the form ∀v1 ∀v2 ... ∀vk Φ, where Φ is Σ∗n−1 .
Likewise, Υ is called Σ∗n iff it is written in the form ∃v1 ∃v2 ... ∃vk Φ, where Φ
is Π∗n−1 . Also, Υ is called Q∗n iff it is a Boolean combination of several Σ∗n and Π∗n
formulae (using the standard connective symbols of ∧ , ∨ , ¬ and → ).
The preceding notation is the same as [20]’s quite conventional definitions for Σn ,
Πn and Qn except that the definitions of Σ∗n , Π∗n and Q∗n employ a U-Grounding language instead of a language using the primitives of arithmetic. In particular since our
U-Grounding language has no function symbol for multiplication, our U-Grounding
based axiom systems α do not implicitly assume that multiplication is a total function.
However, they do certainly retain an ability to encode the graph M (x, y, z) of multiplication as a ∆∗0 formula. For instance, one possible ∆∗0 encoding for M (x, y, z) is
illustrated below:
(4)
z
z−1
[ (x = 0 ∨ y = 0) ⇒ z = 0 ] ∧ [ (x 6= 0 ∧ y 6= 0 ) ⇒ ( = y ∧
<y)]
x
x
Equation (4)’s formal encoding of M (x, y, z)’s graph as a ∆∗0 formula will add a substantial level of semantic depth to our U-Grounding axiom systems α because it
will imply that that these logics will have an understanding of multiplication’s main
generic properties (except of course for the deliberately omitted totality condition of
“ ∀x ∀y ∃ z M (x, y, z) ”.)
In a context where (α, D) is an ordered pair with α representing an axiom system
and with D designating a deduction method, we will also use the following notation:
1. A Level(n) Definition of (α, D) ’s consistency is the declaration that there exists
no Π∗n sentence Υ such that (α, D) supports simultaneous proofs of both Υ
and ¬ Υ.
2. A Level(0-) Definition of (α, D) ’s consistency is the statement that there exists
no proof of 0=1 from the (α, D) configuration.

6

DAN E. WILLARD

All the definitions of consistency, from Level(0-) up to Level(n) for any n , are equivalent to each other under strong enough models of arithmetic. However, many weak
axiom systems do not have a mathematical strength to recognize this equivalence.
Our basic goal will be to determine for what configurations (α, D) is it possible to
construct introspectively unified logics that have a Level(1) understanding of their own
self-consistency. As we shall explain, it will turn out that it is impossible to construct
self-justifying formalisms much above the Level(1). Indeed, there will be some respects
in which a formalism is unable to have even a Level(0-) appreciation of its own selfconsistency.
It is helpful to review the definition of a semantic tableaux proof from Fitting’s or
Smullyan’s textbooks [13, 51] before summarizing our new results. Let us call a sentence Prenex∗ Normalized iff it is either Π∗i or Σ∗i sentence, for some i ≥ 0. Define a
Φ-Focused Candidate Tree for the axiom system α to be a tree structure whose root
corresponds to the sentence ¬ Φ rewritten in Prenex∗ form and whose all other nodes
are either axioms of α or deductions from higher nodes of the tree. Let the notation
“ A =⇒ B ” indicate that B is a valid deduction when A is an ancestor of B in a
specified proof tree. In this notation, the deduction rules allowed in a candidate tree are:
1. Υ ∧ Γ =⇒ Υ and Υ ∧ Γ =⇒ Γ .
2. ¬ ¬ Υ =⇒ Υ. Other rules for the “ ¬ ” symbol include: ¬(Υ∨Γ) =⇒ ¬Υ∧¬Γ,
¬(Υ → Γ) =⇒ Υ ∧ ¬Γ , ¬(Υ ∧ Γ) =⇒ ¬Υ ∨ ¬Γ , ¬ ∃v Υ(v) =⇒ ∀v¬ Υ(v)
and ¬ ∀v Υ(v) =⇒ ∃v ¬Υ(v)
3. A pair of sibling nodes Υ and Γ is allowed when their ancestor is Υ ∨ Γ.
4. A pair of sibling nodes ¬Υ and Γ is allowed when their ancestor is Υ → Γ.
5. ∃v Υ(v) =⇒ Υ(u) where u is a newly introduced “Parameter Symbol”.
6. Our variation of Rule 5 for bounded existential quantifiers of the form “ ∃v ≤ s ”
is the identity: ∃v ≤ s Υ(v) =⇒ u ≤ s ∧ Υ(u)
7. ∀v Υ(v) =⇒ Υ(t) where t denotes a U-Grounded term. These terms are defined to be parameter symbols, constant symbols, or U-Grounding functions with
recursively defined inputs. (Without loss of generality, we may assume that each
“parameter symbol” u, appearing in such a term t, is required to be introduced
by some ancestor of the current node, which has used one of the Rules 5 or 6.)
8. Our variation of Rule 7 for bounded universal quantifiers of the form “ ∀v ≤ s ”
is the identity: ∀v ≤ s Υ(v) =⇒ t ≤ s → Υ(t).
Define a particular leaf-to-root branch in a candidate tree T to be Closed iff it contains
both some sentence Υ and its negation ¬ Υ. A Semantic Tableaux proof of Φ is
then defined to be a candidate tree, all of whose root-to-leaf branches are closed, such
that the tree’s root stores the sentence ¬Φ (rewritten in Prenex∗ normal form) and all
its other nodes are either axioms of α or deductions from higher nodes.
The only distinction between our definition of a semantic tableaux proof and some
other conventional definitions in [13, 51, 64] is that we require Φ’s proof tree to have

AN AXIOM SYSTEM THAT CAN VERIFY ITS OWN CONSISTENCY

7

its root store ¬ Φ written in Prenex∗ normal form, whereas some other conventional
definitions do not have the Prenex∗ requirement. All our results will also hold if we
drop the Prenex∗ requirement. However, the notation will be greatly simplified if we
begin with the Prenex∗ assumption.
We are now ready to define the main deductive method studied in this paper. Let
H denote a sequence of ordered pairs (t1 , p1 ), (t2 , p2 ), ... (tn , pn ), where pi is
a Semantic Tableaux proof of the theorem ti , and where < is an arbitrary class of
sentences. Define H to be a Tab−<−List proof of a theorem T from the axiom
system α iff T = tn and also:
1. Each axiom in pi ’s proof is either one of t1 , t2 , ... , ti−1 or comes from α.
2. Each of the “intermediately derived theorems” t1 , t2 , ... , tn−1 must lie within
the “pre-specified class” < of sentences.
Tab−<−List proofs are thus a stronger deductive method than the semantic tableaux
by allowing for a limited type of modus ponens rule for sentences that belong to the
intermediate class, that is formalized by <. For instance, if < represents the set of
Q∗K sentences, then a Tab−<−List proof would represent a modified form of semantic
tableaux that allows for modus ponens for the Q∗K class of sentences. Henceforth, this
style of proof will be called a “Tab−Q∗k −List” proof. (If < represents the universal set of all sentences, then Tab−<−List deduction will have a deductive-efficiency
essentially equivalent to that of a Hilbert-style proof.)
There are several forms of tab-list deduction that lie between Tab−Q∗k−1 and Tab−Q∗k
List deduction. For instance, let Uk∗ denote the union of the Σ∗k and Π∗k classes. Then
a Tab−Uk∗ −List proof will be defined as a variant of tab-list deduction where < represents the set of Uk∗ sentences. Similarly, the Tab−Σ∗k and Tab−Π∗k −List deductive
methods will be variants of the tab-list formalism where < represents the class of Σ∗k
and Π∗k sentences (respectively).
This notation is useful for describing those introspectively unified logics that are feasible to construct, as well as those which are infeasible. Let A denote an arbitrary
consistent axiom system that employs the U-Grounding language. Then our main positive result will be that if D represents either the Tab−U1∗ −List (or yet the stronger
Tab−Q∗1 deductive method), then it is possible to construct an introspectively unified
logic (α, D) where α is an axiom system capable of recognizing addition as a total
function and also of verifying all A’s Π∗1 theorems. (Both such (α, D) will recognize
their self-consistency under a Level(1) definition for (α, D)-styled consistency.)
On the other hand, a complementary negative result from [70] shows that no analog
of this effect is available for the Tab−Σ∗2 and Tab−Π∗2 −List deductive methods — even
when one uses the fully weak Level(0-) definition of self-consistency. Moreover, there
are a large number of other types of generalizations of the Second Incompleteness Theorem, delineating other respects in which it is impossible to further expand or improve
upon Section 3’s proposed ISD (A) formalism.

8

DAN E. WILLARD

One of these negativistic results will appear in Section 6 of the current paper: It will
demonstrate some inherent limitations associated with Kleene-like “I am consistent”
axioms.
Other directions in which it is impossible to further improve upon ISD (A) will be
discussed during Section 4’s literature survey.
k,m
§3. Formal Description of the ISD (A) and NSD
(A) Axiom Systems. Let A
denote any axiom system which employs the U-Grounding language, and D denote a
deduction method. The symbol ISD (A) will denote an axiom system, associated with
the ordered pair (A, D), that has a simultaneous capacity to:

1. prove all A’s Π∗1 theorems,
2. recognize addition as a total function, and
3. contain a Kleene-like self-referencing axiom asserting its own Level(1) consistency under the deduction method D.
This section will define the ISD (A) axiom system and its similar-looking cousin, called
k,m
NSD
(A). Despite their superficial resemblances, these two axiom system will actually have nearly the opposite properties. Our main goal will be to determine: Which
deduction methods D shall make the ISD (A) formalism consistent? It will be a consequence of the joint research of largely Pudlák and Solovay (reviewed during Section
4’s literature survey) that if D denotes Hilbert deduction then our ISD (A) system will
be automatically inconsistent.
Formal Definition of ISD (A): In a context where A is any axiom system employing the U-Grounding language and D denotes a deduction method, ISD (A) is defined
to be an axiom system with the following four sub-groups of axioms:
Group-Zero: Two of the Group-zero axioms will define the two initial named constant symbols, c̄0 and c̄1 , that designate the integers of 0 and 1. The third
and fourth Group-zero axioms will define the growth functions of addition and
Double(x) = x + x. In conjunction, the net effect of these four Group-zero axioms will be to set up the machinery to define unambiguously any natural number
n ≥ 2 as a term using only the constant symbol c̄1 and employing O( Log n )
appearances of the function symbols for the addition and doubling operations.
Section 2 had indicated that such a term, analogous to Equation (3), which encodes n in a binary-like format, will be denoted as n .
Group-1: This axiom group will consist of a finite set of Π∗1 sentences, called F,
such that the union of F with the Group-zero axioms is sufficient to prove every
∆∗0 sentence that is valid under the standard model of the natural numbers. (Any
finite set of Π∗1 sentences F with this property may be used to define Group-1. One
suitable finite set of axioms was defined by Table I of our article [67]. However,
any other alternate finite set of Π∗1 axioms is equally suitable.)

AN AXIOM SYSTEM THAT CAN VERIFY ITS OWN CONSISTENCY

9

Group-2: Throughout this paper, d Φ e will denote the Gödel number of Φ. Also
PrfA (t, p) will denote a ∆∗0 formula indicating that p is a proof of the theorem
t from the axiom system A. For each Π∗1 sentence Φ, the Group-2 schema
will contain an axiom of the form (5), written in Π∗1 normalized form. Thus, the
Group-2 scheme shall trivially endow ISD (A) with a capacity to verify all A’s Π∗1
theorems.
(5)

∀ p { Prf A ( d Φ e , p ) → Φ }

Group-3: This axiom group will consist of one single Π∗1 sentence stating essentially
that:
∗ In the context of the deduction methodology D, there exists no two
proofs of both some Π∗1 sentence and its formal negation from the union
of the Group-zero, 1 and 2 axioms with this sentence (itself).
In order to formally encode the self-referential statement ∗ as a Π∗1 sentence,
let Pair(x, y) denote a ∆∗0 formula indicating x is the Gödel number of a Π∗1
sentence and y is x ’s negation. Also, let Prf ISD (A) (t, b) denote a ∆∗0 formula
that indicates that b is a proof (using the deduction method D ) of the theorem
t from the axiom system ISD (A). In this context, the formal encoding of ∗ can
be approximated as:
(6)

∀ x ∀ y ∀ p ∀ q ¬ [ Pair(x, y) ∧ Prf ISD (A) (x, p) ∧ Prf ISD (A) (y, q) ]

More Detailed Description of the Group-3 Axiom:
A formal description of
ISD (A)’s Group-3 axiom is more complicated than the abbreviated descriptions given
either by Sentence ∗ or by Equation (6)’s analog. The main added complication is
because the Group-3 axiom declares the consistency of a formal set of axioms that includes “itself” (in the words of Sentence ∗ ). As was noted in Section 1, the notion of
an axiom including “itself” when it refers to the consistency of an axiom schema dates
back to Kleene’s 1938 paper [24]. However, Kleene’s abbreviated description is insufficient to establish that Equation (6) can be encoded precisely as a Π∗1 sentence. The next
two paragraphs will explain how this can be done.
Let UNION(A) denote the union of ISD (A)’s Group-Zero, Group-1 and Group-2
axioms. We will also use the following notation:
i: PrfDU N ION (A) ( t , p ) will denote a formula designating that p is a proof of the
theorem t from the axiom system UNION(A) using the deduction method D.
ii: ExPrfDU N ION (A) ( h , t , p ) will be a formula stating that p is a proof (using
the deduction method D ) of a theorem t from the union of the axiom system
UNION(A) with the added axiom sentence whose Gödel number equals h .
iii: Subst ( g , h ) will denote Gödel’s classic substitution formula — which yields
TRUE when g is an encoding of a formula and h is an encoding of a sentence that
replaces all occurrence of free variables in g with the formally Gödel-encoded
term of g .

10

DAN E. WILLARD

iv: SubstPrfDU N ION (A) ( g , t , p ) will denote the natural hybridizations of the constructs from Items (ii) and (iii) which yields a Boolean value of TRUE exactly
when there exists some integer h simultaneously satisfying both the conditions
Subst ( g , h ) and ExPrfDU N ION (A) ( h , t , p ).
Each of (i)–(iv) can be encoded as ∆∗0 formulae. Thus, Appendices C and D of [67]
explained how the first three of these predicates can receive ∆∗0 encodings when one
applies the theory of LinH functions [20, 25, 73]. In such a context, Equation (7) illustrates one possible ∆∗0 encoding for SubstPrfDU N ION (A) (g, t, p)’s graph. (It is equivalent to “ ∃ h [ Subst(g, h) ∧ ExPrfDU N ION (A) (h, t, p) ] ”, but Equation (7) is a ∆∗0
formula — unlike the quoted expression.)
(7)
PrfDU N ION (A) ( t , p ) ∨ ∃ h ≤ p [ Subst ( g , h ) ∧ ExPrfDU N ION (A) ( h , t , p ) ]
Utilizing (7)’s ∆∗0 encoding for SubstPrfD
U N ION (A) (g, t, p), it is easy to encode the
∗
Group-3 axiom of ISD (A) as a Π1 sentence. Thus, let Γ(g) denote Equation (8)’s
formula, and let n denote Γ(g)’s Gödel number. Then “ Γ( n ) ” is a Π∗1 sentence
encoding this Group-3 axiom.
(8)
D
∀ x ∀ y ∀ p ∀ q ¬ [ Pair(x, y) ∧ SubstPrfD
U N ION (A) (g, x, p) ∧ SubstPrfU N ION (A) (g, y, q) ]
Thus in a context where n denotes (8)’s Gödel number, the construct Prf ISD (A) (t, p)
can receive a formal ∆∗0 encoding as : “ SubstPrfDU N ION (A) ( n , t , p ) ”.
Section 5 will use the preceding paragraph’s ∆∗0 encoding for “ Prf ISD (A) (t, p) ”
to interpret Equation (6)’s Group-3 axiom as a Π∗1 sentence. (This Π∗1 encoding will be
important in Section 5. Our results would be substantially less significant if Equation
(6) had a weaker Π∗2 encoding.)
The Broader Perspective of this Article: The potential difficulty pertaining to
ISD (A) is that there is no guarantee that it is consistent. Thus using Section 1’s nomenclature, ISD (A) can potentially violate “Part-ii” of the definition for “introspective unification”
For instance, Section 4’s literature survey will explain how the combined work of
Nelson, Pudlák, Solovay and Wilkie-Paris [34, 41, 52, 64] implies no consistent axiom
system can recognize its own Hilbert-consistency when it recognizes Successor as total.
Thus, ISD (A) can not satisfy Part-ii of the definition of introspective unification when
D represents Hilbert deduction.
What types of deduction methods D do have the property that ISD (A) can satisfy
Part-ii of the definition of introspective unification ? Three definitions will help answer
this question.
D EFINITION 1. Consider a function = which maps an initial axiom system A
(employing the language of the U-Grounding functions) onto a second axiom system,

AN AXIOM SYSTEM THAT CAN VERIFY ITS OWN CONSISTENCY

11

denoted as =(A). Let us call this function = Consistency Preserving iff =(A)
is guaranteed to be consistent whenever A ’s Π∗1 theorems are valid in the standard
model. (In this notation, the main problem considered in this article is to identify the
axiom mapping functions = ( • ) that are consistency-preserving.)
D EFINITION 2. Throughout this paper, Log(z) will denote Base-2 Logarithm, with
downwards rounding to the lowest integer, and Logk (z) will denote Log(Log...(Log(z)))
— where k is an integer indicating the number of iterations of Log here. The symbol
k
2m
k will denote the least integer z such that Log (z) ≥ m. Also, Υ( k , m ) will
∗
denote the Σ1 sentence defined below:
(9)

∃ z Log k (z) ≥ m

k,m
D EFINITION 3. The axiom system NSD
(A) shall have an identical definition as
ISD (A), except for the following two changes:
k,m
a: The Group-zero schema of NSD
(A) will include Υ( k , m ) as an added axiom.
k,m
b: NSD
(A)’s Group-3 axiom will have an identical structure as ISD (A)’s Groupk,m
3 axiom — except that NSD
(A)’s Group-3 axiom will be sensitive to the change
that was made by Item (a) above. Thus, the meaning of the word “this” in the
Group-3 axiom that declares “This system is consistent” will be sensitive to the
fact that the construct “this” now refers to a system that includes Υ( k , m ) as an
axiom under its scope.

The two main theorems in this paper are Theorems 5 and 6. The former result will
establish that ISD ( • ) is a consistency-preserving transformation for the case where
D denotes Tab−U1∗ −List deduction. On the other hand, Theorem 6 will show that this
k,m
consistency preservation property does not extend to NSD
( • ) for most values of k
and m — even in the extremal case where D represents a cut-free deductive method,
such as semantic tableaux.
The contrast between Theorems 5 and 6 is clearly counter-intuitive. After all, the
version of ISD (A) — where D represents Tab−U1∗ −List deduction — has an ability
to prove the validity of Equation (9)’s sentence Υ( k , m ) and then to use this sentence
as an intermediate step during the proofs of subsequent theorems.
However, such proofs would be sharply shorter if ISD (A) could treat Υ( k , m ) as
k,m
a starting axiom, similar to the NSD
(A) formalism. In essence, this fact combined
k,m
with Part-b of the definition of NSD (A) will alter sufficiently the meaning of the word
k,m
“this” in Definition 3’s formalization of NSD
(A) for Theorems 5 and 6 to provide
contrasting results.
One reason this topic is interesting is because it clarifies the nature of the threshold
where the Second Incompleteness Theorem takes force. A second interesting aspect of

12

DAN E. WILLARD

Theorem 5 is that it is stronger than [67]’s prior results because 1) it uses a Level(1)
(rather than Level(0-) ) definition of consistency and 2) its modus ponens rule extends
to all Σ∗1 and Π∗1 sentences. Moreover, Section 4’s literature survey will explain that
ISD (A) is near-maximal because a variety of generalizations of the Second Incompleteness Theorem show that it is difficult to further improve in most directions that one
would want to pursue.
§4. Literature Survey. Research into the incompleteness phenomena began with
Gödel’s 1931 paper [16] and with Rosser’s removal [47] of Gödel’s ω−consistency
assumption. Gödel’s Second Incompleteness Theorem indicated that no extension of
Peano Arithmetic can verify its own consistency. The literature has subsequently used
the symbol Q to denote an axiom system weaker than Peano Arithmetic, which contains no induction schema and which essentially only recognizes addition and multiplication as total functions. Tarski-Mostowski-Robinson [58], showed a construct called
“Essential Undecidability”, was valid for Q, all its extensions, but none of its subsets.
Several articles have subsequently developed formal generalizations of the Second
Incompleteness Theorem for Q. The first of these, by Bezboruah-Shepherdson [7], explored a paradigm that was dependent on the exact encoding of the provability predicate.
Stronger results were subsequently derived by other authors. Some further notation is
needed to summarize these results.
Let S(x) denote the “successor” operation that maps the integer x onto x + 1. A
formula ϕ(x) is called [20] a Definable Cut for an axiom system α iff α can prove:
(10)

ϕ(0) AND ∀ x { ϕ(x) → ϕ[S(x)] } AND ∀ x ∀ y < x { ϕ(x) → ϕ(y) }

Definable cuts have been studied by a very extensive literature [1, 4, 9, 10, 17, 19, 20,
23, 26, 25, 34, 37, 38, 40, 41, 43, 55, 60, 61, 63, 64]. All axioms systems, strictly weaker
than Peano Arithmetic, contain some definable cut that is not provably equivalent to the
full set of integers. (In the proof-theory literature, the definition of “Definable cuts” is
conceptually unrelated to Gentzen’s notion of a sequent calculus deductive “cut rule”,
despite their similar sounding names.)
In a context where Υ(x) and ϕ(x) denote two definable cuts, the formula ϕ(x)
has been called a Thinning of Υ(x) (relative to α ) iff α can prove:
(11)

∀ x [ ϕ(x) → Υ(x) ]

Several articles [9, 20, 23, 25, 34, 37, 41, 43, 44, 61, 64, 67] have credited some unpublished comments of Robert Solovay for observing (in Definition 2’s notation) that for
each integer K and definable cut Υ(x), there exists a thinning ϕ(x) of Υ(x) where
most naturally-formed arithmetic axiom system α can prove:
(12)
K

p
∀ p [ ϕ(p) → ∃ q Υ(q) ∧ q = 2pK ] AND ∀ p [ ϕ(p) → ∃ r ϕ(r) ∧ r = 22·Log
]
K

AN AXIOM SYSTEM THAT CAN VERIFY ITS OWN CONSISTENCY

13

It is somewhat awkward to provide an exact summary of Solovay’s theorem because
Solovay never published it, and several authors [9, 20, 23, 25, 34, 37, 41, 43, 44, 61, 64,
67] have provided several slightly different interpretations of it. For instance, we were
deliberately vague in the second sentence of this paragraph when stating Solovay’s theorem applied to “most naturally-formed” arithmetic systems, since the latter italicized
phrase can have several different interpretations. One possible resolution for this ambiguity is to introduce the notion of a Successor-based Arithmetic axiom system, as
formally defined in the Footnote 1 , and to view Equation (12)’s Thinning Formalism as
applying to any “Successor-based” axiom system α.
Equation (12)’s 2-part condition (and its various analogs) has been used to classify
the generality of the Second Incompleteness Theorem. Let d Ψ e denote Ψ ’s Gödel
number, and PrfD
α (t, p) denote p is a proof of the theorem t from the axiom system
α using the deduction method D. Then α will be said to recognize its Cut-Localized
D-consistency under ϕ(x) iff α can prove:
(15)

∀ p { ϕ(p) → ¬ PrfD
α ( d0 = 1e , p ) }

The recent literature has sought to identify exactly what triples ( ϕ , D , α ) have
the property that α can prove (15)’s self-reflecting statement about itself. Both negative and positive results, about the feasibility of constructing such triples, have been
established.
A crucial negative result concerning the nature of Cut-Localized D-consistency was
developed by Pudlák. The article [41] formalizes a generalization of the Second Incompleteness Theorem that shows that if D denotes Hilbert deduction and α represents
1 A “SUCCESSOR-BASED ARITHMETIC” axiom system α can be thought of intuitively as an axiomatic framework that recognizes Successor as a total function and which treats Addition, Multiplication and
Exponentiation as three binary and ternary relations, denoted as A(x, y, z), M (x, y, z), and E(x, y), rather
than as formally total functions. By this, we mean that α will posses a finite set of Π 1 −like axioms built out
of the atomic objects of a successor function symbol and the five predicate symbols for the equality, less-than,
A(x, y, z), M (x, y, z), and E(x, y) relations, such that the basic associative, commutative, distributive and
identity axioms for addition and multiplication, as well as the inductive definition of the exponent operation,
can be expressed by such Π1 −like axioms. For instance, Equations (13) and (14) are examples of such
Π1 −like axioms, declaring that addition satisfies the commutative principle, and that the exponent operation
satisfies its conventional inductive axiomatic definition.

(13)

∀x ∀y ∀z { A(x, y, z) −→ A(y, x, z) }

(14)

∀x ∀y ∀z { [ E(x, y) ∧ A(y, y, z) ] ←→ E( Successor(x) , z ) }

IMPORTANT ADDED COMMENT about this Definition: There are several possible alternate somewhat broader definitions of a “Successor-Based Arithmetic” axiom system α, where both Equation (12)’s
Thinning Formalism and Theorem ∗ ’s variation of the Second Incompleteness will continue to hold. For
example, it follows from Benett’s dissertation [6] that our preceding definition needs no explicit reference to
E(x, y)’s exponent predicate (because it is ∆0 definable in terms of addition and multiplication). Also, the
opening chapters of Nelson’s book [34] essentially implied that we may permissibly start with weaker principles than the associative, commutative and distributive axioms for addition and multiplication. However for
the purposes of the current chapter’s abbreviated literature survey, the preceding definition for “SuccessorBased Arithmetics” is essentially adequate for understanding the main aspects of Equation (12)’s Thinning
Formalism and its use by Theorem ∗.

14

DAN E. WILLARD

any consistent extension of Q, then α must be unable to prove (15)’s statement about
the “cut” ϕ.
The implications of Pudlák’s theorem can be further appreciated when one reviews
some additional work by Nelson, Solovay and Wilkie-Paris. One of the opening chapters of Nelson’s book [34] explored an axiom system, called Q0 , that had a conventional interpretation for the successor function, but which allowed for unconventional
interpretations for addition and multiplication. By employing definable cuts as an intermediate concept, Nelson observed that this axiom system had many properties similar
to the Tarski-Mostowski-Robinson axiom system Q [58]. Wilkie-Paris [64] used the
theory of definable cuts to prove several new versions of the Second Incompleteness
Theorem in [64] — one of which indicated that IΣ0 + Exp is unable to prove the
Hilbert consistency of Q. Solovay [52] observed that one could combine the Pudlák
theorem (from the prior paragraph) with the formalisms of Nelson and Wilkie-Paris to
establish the following result:
Theorem ∗ (Solovay’s generalization of Pudlák’s Theorem 2.3 from [41]
using the additional mathematical methodologies of Nelson and Wilkie-Paris
[34, 64], as approximately summarized in [52]’s 4-page proof.) No consistent axiom system, satisfying the “Successor-Based Arithmetic Criteria”
defined formally by Footnote 1, can possibly prove the non-existence of a
Hilbert-proof of 0 = 1 from itself.
Aside from the work of Pudlák, Solovay and Wilkie-Paris already mentioned, there
are many other generalizations of the Second Incompleteness Theorem for weak logics
[1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9, 11, 14, 15, 20, 21, 23, 29, 36, 37, 38, 40, 43, 45, 57, 66, 70].
The reason for our special interest in Theorem ∗ is because this theorem, as described
in reference [52], can help identify the precise circumstances where it is infeasible to
develop an introspectively unified logic. In particular, [67, 72] have shown it is possible
to devise introspective systems (α, D) when either:
A: D represents Semantic Tableaux deduction and α is an axiom system that
recognizes addition but not multiplication as a total function [65, 67], or
B: D represents Hilbert deduction and α is a system that drops the axiom that addition is a total function and replaces it with the weaker “additive naming convention” of [72].
The Theorem ∗ is relevant to the topics (A) and (B) because it shows that the natural
hybrid of these two introspective logics is infeasible — for the case where D corresponds to Hilbert deduction and α recognizes addition (or even merely successor) as
total.
Hence the contrast between Theorem ∗ ’s negative result with the positive results
from Items (A) and (B) leads one to want to identify the exact juncture where the Second

AN AXIOM SYSTEM THAT CAN VERIFY ITS OWN CONSISTENCY

15

Incompleteness Theorem takes force among axiom systems that recognize addition as a
total function. More precisely, it raises the following question:
# Which precise class of deduction methods D shall allow for an introspectively unified logic when α recognizes addition as a total function?
One part of an essentially 3-part answer to Question # was contained in our recent
conference paper [70]. It showed that there existed a fixed Π∗1 theorem W, valid in
the standard model of arithmetic (and actually provable from Peano Arithmetic), such
that no consistent axiom system α can simultaneously prove W, recognize addition
as a total function and verify its own self-consistency under either of the Tab−Σ∗2 or
Tab−Π∗2 deduction methods. In effect, this means that the modus ponens rules for either Σ∗2 or Π∗2 sentences are sufficient to enact the power of the Second Incompleteness
Theorem for essentially all axiom systems α which recognize addition as total. (The
article [70] also explains how its results are related to some techniques that were developed by Adamowicz, Paris, Pudlák, Solovay, Takeuti, Wilkie, Zbierski and ourselves in
[1, 4, 38, 41, 52, 57, 64, 68].)
Section 5 will present the second part of our 3-way answer to Question #. It will
explore this question from an essentially opposite perspective as [70] by seeking a positive rather than negative-oriented answer to Question #. By analyzing the properties
of Section 3’s ISD (A) system, Section 5 will show that an introspectively unified logic
(α, D) can simultaneously recognize its self-consistency under a modus ponens principle at the level of Σ∗1 and Π∗1 formulae and also retain an ability to prove all Peano
Arithmetic’s Π∗1 theorems.
A third part of our answer to the Question # will appear in Section 6. It will show
k,m
(A), is inconsistent.
that a close cousin of ISD (A), which Definition 3 had called NSD
Hence, the combination of our positive and negative results will help characterize the
threshold points where the Second Incompleteness Theorem takes force.
The prior literature has used an approach quite different from ISD (A)’s Group-3
axiomatic mechanism for formalizing a type of respect in which an axiom system α can
evade the Incompleteness Theorem and obtain a partial understanding of its own selfconsistency. It has sought to accomplish this objective by formalizing some Definable
Cuts ϕ such that an axiom system α has an ability to prove the validity of its own
Cut-Localized D-consistency within the domain of ϕ ’s definable cut (as is formally
defined by Equation (15) ). Some examples of this type of phenomena are listed below:
A: In a context where D denotes a second order generalization of Gentzen’s sequent calculus and α is a formalization of arithmetic among the natural numbers,
the Kreisel-Takeuti system [27, 56] can prove Equation (15)’s statement about its
own D-consistency.
B: Nelson [34] demonstrated that a variant of the axiom system Q (with linear
ordering) can corroborate Equation (15)’s statement about its own Cut-Localized

16

DAN E. WILLARD

consistency when D denotes Herbrand deduction and the cut ϕ is carefully
chosen.
C: Pudlák has formalized a major generalization of Items A and B that has very
far-reaching and generic implications. The article [41] demonstrates that every
“sequential” [20] axiom system α of finite cardinality can be associated with a
definable cut ϕ such that α can prove Equation (15) is valid for ϕ when D
denotes any cut-free method of deduction. (Indeed for an arbitrary definable cut
Υ, this cut ϕ can be chosen to be a thinning of Υ. ) At the same time, [41]
showed that no consistent α ⊃ Q can prove any form of (15)’s sentence about
itself when D denotes Hilbert deduction.
D: While GB Set Theory can prove its global Hilbert consistency is equivalent to the
global Hilbert consistency of ZF Set Theory, Hájek, Švejdar and Vopěnka [55, 63]
have shown GB views these theories differently inside the ranges of definable cuts.
Thus, Vopěnka-Hájek [63] identified a definable cut ϕ where GB Set Theory
can prove Equation (15)’s validity when D denotes Hilbert deduction and α
denotes ZF Set Theory. Moreover, Švejdar [55] has generalized this phenomena
with regards to interpretability. These results are surprising because Pudlák [41]
subsequently proved GB can never verify its own Hilbert consistency on any of
Equation (15)’s definable cuts. Thus, GB will view its Hilbert consistency as
equivalent to ZF’s Hilbert consistency in a global sense — but not in a sense
localized within each definable cut.
E: The notion of relative interpretability was made explicit as early as 1953 by
Tarski-Mostowski-Robinson [58]. This topic and lattices of interpretability have
been systematically studied by Feferman, Kreisel, Lindström, Montague, Mycielski, Orey, Pudlák and Švejdar [11, 12, 32, 31, 33, 35, 28, 54, 55, 39]. Characterizations of relative interpretability for reflexive axiom systems with infinite
cardinality were obtained by Hájek [17, 18, 19] using the Orey Compactness Theorem, and for finite theories by Friedman and Pudlák independently [14, 41] —
with Visser subsequently extending some of these results and introducing the notion of a feasible interpretation in [59, 62]. (Friedman never published his results
of [15], which instead have been surveyed in articles by Pudlák, Smoryński and
Visser [43, 50, 59, 62] and which were also largely independently reconstructed
by Pudlák.) For essentially all finite theories S and T , the theory S has an interpretation in T if and only if IΣ0 + Exp can prove T ’s Herbrand consistency
implies S’s Herbrand consistency.
F: Let Conϕ (IΣ0 ) denote the particular variation of Equation (15) where α =IΣ0
and where D designates Hilbert-style deduction. Krajı́cek [26] proved that
for any IΣ0 cut Υ there exists a thinner IΣ0 cut ϕ such that the theorem
IΣ0 + Conϕ (IΣ0 ) + ¬ ConΥ (IΣ0 ) is consistent. Visser [61] has generalized this
construct to show that many consistent axiom systems, such as Q, ACA0 and
GB-Set Theory, have the property that no finite consistent extension of themselves

AN AXIOM SYSTEM THAT CAN VERIFY ITS OWN CONSISTENCY

17

implies there exists Hilbert-style proofs of 0=1 from themselves simultaneously
positioned in every one of their definable cuts.
The underlying framework behind the ISD (A) system (of Section 3) is significantly
different from the results summarized by Items A–F. The main reason ISD (A) is of
interest is because it is able to internally recognize its own self-consistency in a global
sense (rather than in a more narrow localized respect using Equation (15)’s Definable
Cut formula ϕ ). On the other hand, the price we pay for this added degree of generality
is quite considerable — since ISD (A) treats multiplication as a 3-way relation — rather
than as a total function.
A key point that needs to be appreciated is that this trade-off is essentially unavoidable. This point can be understood by taking a look at the recent literature on weak
axiom systems. Aside from the work of Pudlák, Solovay and Wilkie-Paris already
mentioned, other recent papers about incompleteness for weak axiom systems (listed
chronologically) include: Paris-Dimitracopoulos’s observation [37] that one cannot
universally define thinnings of definable cuts that are closed automatically under exponentiation, several generalizations of the Second Incompleteness Theorem for Bounded
Arithmetic by Buss and Ignjatovic [8, 9], Takeuti’s observation [57] that one can define an exponentially-small and super-exponentially-small proof predicate that has some
useful features for proving incompleteness results for cut-free deduction, AdamowiczZbierski’s observations [1, 4] that IΣ0 + Ω1 is unable to verify its cut-free consistency,
and some further generalizations of Adamowicz-Zbierski’s result for IΣ0 by Willard
[66, 68] and more recently Salehi [48]. Moreover, [66, 68] has also extended this formalism to show that for each cut-free deduction method D, there exists a particular
well-defined Π∗1 sentence, called WD , such that every consistent system α ⊃ WD is
unable to simultaneously recognize multiplication as total and to also prove a theorem
affirming its Level(0-) consistency under D. This result is relevant to any effort to hybridize the theorems from the articles listed in Items A–F with ISD (A) because it shows
that such hybridizations cannot globalize Equation (15)’s notion of a Cut-Localized
D-consistency, and simultaneously extend ISD (A) to recognize multiplication as total.
Our result about multiplication [66, 68] is different from the incompleteness theorems of Bezboruah-Shepherdson, Pudlák, Solovay and Wilkie-Paris in [7, 41, 52, 64]
by applying to a paradigm where D is a cut-free rather than a cut-permissive deduction method. It establishes that any effort to find a cut-free deduction method D and
an axiom system α — where α can prove its Level(0-) consistency under D without
relying upon Equation (15)’s Definable Cuts — is fruitless when α recognizes multiplication as total and α ⊃ WD . Its incompleteness result explains why our goal will
be to drop the Π∗2 axiom that declares multiplication is total, so that Section 5’s ISD (A)
axiom system can obtain a Tab−U1∗ −List (or slightly greater) understanding of its own
self-consistency.
This alternate perspective is useful partly because it is interesting to consider axiomatic formalisms that do not rely upon Equation (15)’s notion of a locally-defined

18

DAN E. WILLARD

consistency property for gaining a partial understanding of their own self-consistencies.
This approach clearly has its limitations because ISD (A) drops the important axiom
that multiplication is total. However in a context where the philosophical paradox associated with Gödel’s Second Incompleteness Theorem is inherently perplexing, it is of
theoretic interest to consider ISD (A)’s alternate properties.
A second reason for interest in ISD (A) is because a multiplicity of generalizations
of the Second Incompleteness Theorem, including one especially relevant new effect
delineated in Section 6, collectively imply that further efforts to improve ISD (A) will
meet inherent limitations.

§5. The Consistency Preservation Property of ISD ( • ). This chapter will be divided into three subsections. Section 5.1 will describe a general framework for determining which deduction methods D are associated with “ISD ( • ) mappings” that are
consistency-preserving. Section 5.2 and 5.3 will prove that these conditions are met
respectively when D represents semantic tableaux and Tab−U1∗ −List deduction.
Some readers may be feeling a bit puzzled by Section 3’s announcement that a close
k,m
cousin of ISD ( • ), called NSD
( • ), always fails to satisfy the consistency-preserving
property. A 3-paragraph summary about the intuitive differences between ISD ( • ) and
k,m
NSD
( • ) is provided by Section 6.1 of the next chapter.
It is unnecessary for the reader to examine Section 6.1’s short 3-paragraph passage
before he enters the current chapter. However, if a reader takes a quick glance at Section
6.1 at this juncture, he may find some of his most puzzling questions are answered.
5.1. Structural Aspects of Main Proof. The Appendix A describes one canonical
method for assigning Gödel encodings to proofs using the ISD (A) axiom system. This
encoding method is roughly the same as what Wilkie-Paris [64] had called a natural
B-adic encoding — or a similar counterpart in the Hájek-Pudlák textbook [20]. Such Badic encodings are maximally compressed in that their encoding for a proof p will have
a bit-length approximately proportional to the effort for writing down such a proof by
hand. The Appendix A’s formalized description of our encoding conventions is provided
only for the sake of completeness. Its reading can be easily omitted.
Some added notation is needed to help introduce this section’s main theorem. Let
us say a Π∗1 sentence ∀x1 ∀x2 ... ∀xn ψ(x1 , x2 ...xn ) satisfies the App∀(a) condition
when Equation (16) is true:
(16)

∀x1 ≤ a ∀x2 ≤ a ... ∀xn ≤ a ψ(x1 , x2 ...xn )

Similarly, a Σ∗1 sentence ∃x1 ∃x2 ... ∃xn ψ(x1 , x2 ...xn ) is said to satisfy App∃(b)
when (17) is true.
(17)

∃x1 ≤ b ∃x2 ≤ b ... ∃xn ≤ b ψ(x1 , x2 ...xn )

AN AXIOM SYSTEM THAT CAN VERIFY ITS OWN CONSISTENCY

19

These definitions refer only to the ranges of a sentence’s unbounded universal and existential quantifiers. Bounded quantifiers do not have their ranges changed similarly
under these definitions.
D EFINITION 4. For any ordered pair (a, b) with a > b ≥ 1, let us say an axiom
system α satisfies the Normed(a,b) condition iff:
1. All α’s axioms are either Π∗1 sentences satisfying the App∀(a) condition or Σ∗1
sentences satisfying the App∃(b) condition.
2. α uses a language that employs the eight U-Grounding function symbols and
absolutely no other function symbols.
(The second condition is designed to preclude α from employing a multiplication
function symbol — or any of its many functional equivalents.)

Definition 5 will be the main engine used to prove ISD ( • )’s consistency preservation
property, for actually several different deduction methods D. It did not exist in our prior
papers. It is helpful for both shortening several of our prior proofs — and for producing
substantially stronger results:
D EFINITION 5. Let α denote an Normed(a, b) system with a > b ≥ 1, Φ denote
some Π∗1 or Σ∗1 sentence, and p denote the Gödel number of some proof from α of
the theorem Φ (using the deduction method D ). Let θ < 13 be a positive constant,
and p satisfy Equation (18).
a
(18)
p ≤ d e + 1
b
Then the deduction method D will be called θ−Compactified iff every such tuple
(α, Φ, p, a, b) satisfies the following two conditions:
A: If Φ is a Σ∗1 theorem (whose proof p satisfies the above conditions), then Φ
has an App∃( b · pθ ) level of validity.
a
B: Likewise if Φ is a Π∗1 theorem proved by p, it must have an App∀( θ ) level
p
of validity.

T HEOREM 1. For some positive constant θ < 13 , let us assume that D is a
θ−Compactified deduction method. Then the ISD ( • ) mapping transformation is a
“consistency-preserving” operation. (Consistency Preservation was defined by Definition 1. It indicates that ISD (A) is automatically a consistent axiom system whenever
A ’s Π∗1 theorems are valid in the standard model.)

20

DAN E. WILLARD

P ROOF. Our justification of Theorem 1 will be a proof by contradiction. It will
therefore begin by assuming that all A ’s Π∗1 theorems are valid in the standard model
but ISD (A) is inconsistent. It will show this assumption leads to a contradiction.
In our discussion, j1 will represent a proof of some Π∗1 theorem, called say Φ,
and j2 will be a proof of the Σ∗1 theorem that is Φ’s negation. Also, m will denote
the quantity Max(j1 , j2 ). If ISD (A) is inconsistent, then such a triple ( j1 , j2 , m )
will clearly exist. Let us therefore select such a triple whose third component has the
minimum possible value for m.
It is obvious that all ISD (A)’s Group-0 and 1 axioms are valid under the standard
model. From our starting assumption that all A ’s Π∗1 theorems are valid in the standard
model, it immediately follows that all ISD (A)’s Group-2 axioms are also valid in the
standard model. Moreover, all these axioms can be encoded as Π∗1 sentences (when they
are written in Prenex* form). Hence since ISD (A)’s Group-3 axiom sentence becomes
invalid only for integers greater than m − 1, ISD (A) is certainly a Normed(m − 1, 1)
system.
We already observed that the two Gödel numbers, j1 and j2 , that prove Φ and
its negation, are integers no larger than m. These facts, Definition 5 and ISD (A)’s
m−1
) or
Normed(m − 1, 1) property immediately imply that that Φ has an App∀(
mθ
θ
greater level of validity and its negation has at least a App∃( m ) level of validity.
These observations are all that is needed to bring our proof-by-contradiction to its
desired conclusion. This is because if g > h, then it is clearly impossible for both a
Π∗1 sentence Φ to have an App∀( g ) level of validity and for simultaneously the Σ∗1
sentence corresponding to its negation to have an App∃( h ) level of validity. Yet prem−1
cisely this pair of inherently incompatible conditions is established, with g =
mθ
and h = mθ by the last sentence of the preceding paragraph (since θ < 31 implies g > h ). Hence ISD (A) must be forced to be consistent, since the alternative
hypothesis would otherwise force two inherently incompatible conditions to become
simultaneously valid.
a

R EMARK 1. The next two sections will apply Theorem 1 to prove that ISD ( • )’s
mapping transformation is consistency-preserving in the two particular cases where D
represents semantic tableaux and Tab−U1∗ −List deduction. Although we will not have
the page space to do so, there are many other examples where Theorem 1’s formalism
is also useful. For instance, it can be used to prove the ISD ( • ) transformation is
consistency-preserving in the additional cases where D represents the cut-free version
of the sequent calculus, Herbrand deduction, Tab−Q∗1 −List deduction, or a variant of
Hilbert deduction where each intermediate formula in a proof is required to have a
Q∗1 format. In each of these cases, the proof of consistency preservation has a similar
structure: It involves first doing a detailed case analysis showing the relevant method

AN AXIOM SYSTEM THAT CAN VERIFY ITS OWN CONSISTENCY

21

D satisfies Definition 5’s θ−Compactification condition and then applying Theorem
1’s machinery.
R EMARK 2. Proofs by contradiction are often quite difficult to visualize in mathematics because of their non-constructive nature. The core proof of Theorem 4.3 in [67]
had this problem. On the other hand, our current proof of Theorem 1 is much easier to
visualize. Thus in addition to strengthening [67]’s results, Theorem 1’s machinery and
its formal applications in the next two sections are also much more easy to visualize.
R EMARK 3. Section 4’s literature survey had indicated that Solovay had combined
the formalisms of Nelson, Pudlák and Wilkie-Paris to prove that no axiom system recognizing Successor as a total function can verify its own Hilbert consistency. Also, our
literature review had mentioned that [70] has generalized this prior result to establish
that there exists essentially no introspectively unified logics (α, D) where α can
recognize addition as a total function and D has the power of either the Tab−Π∗2 or
Tab−Σ∗2 −List deductive methodologies. At this juncture, it is possible to explain intuitively why these generalizations of the Incompleteness Theorem hold. It is because
their deductive methods do not satisfy Parts (A) and (B) of Definition 5’s requirements
for θ−Compactification. Hence, some significant generalizations of the Second Incompleteness Theorem take place at exactly the level where Definition 5’s formalism
becomes no longer applicable.
R EMARK 4. It also noteworthy that Parts (A) and (B) of Definition 5’s requirements
are impossible to satisfy when Part-2 of the definition of a Normed(a,b) system is expanded to allow for multiplication to appear as a ninth function symbol. This is intuitively because multiplication has a faster growth property than addition, which will
overwhelm Definition 5’s constraints. Moreover, a Level(0-) styled semantic tableaux
generalization of the Second Incompleteness Theorem in [68] implies that no useful
analog of Definition 5 can be found for axiom systems recognizing multiplication as a
total function, under any possible deduction method D, whether cut-free or otherwise.

5.2. Formal Analysis of Semantic Tableaux Deduction. This section will prove
semantic tableaux satisfies Definition 5’s θ−Compactification property when θ = 41 .
In conjunction with Theorem 1 and with some further results proven in Section 5.3, this
result will imply that the ISD ( • ) mapping is a consistency-preserving transformation
when D designates either semantic tableaux or Tab−U1∗ −List deduction.
Notation: Given an axiom system Z, a Z–Based Deduction Tree is defined as
a tree of sentences — where every node of this tree is either a formal axiom of Z
or a deduction from an axiom, using one of Section 2’s eight rules for Tableaux-style
deductions. This definition differs from a Semantic Tableaux proof in two respects.
These are:

22

DAN E. WILLARD

i: Since a Z–Based Deduction Tree is not technically “a proof”, its root will store
an axiom of Z (rather than store the negation of a target theorem).
ii: Unlike Section 2’s definition of a “Semantic Tableaux proof tree”, a Z–Based
Deduction Tree will not be required to have every one of its branches “closed” by
a pair of contradictory sentences. (Indeed, if Z is consistent, then its Z–Based
Deduction Trees will always contain at least one branch that is not “closed”.)
Also, the notation (below) is used when discussing Z–Based Deduction Trees:
1. The U-Length of a node sentence s is defined to be the number of U-grounding
function symbols appearing in this sentence.
2. The U-Depth of a node sentence s, henceforth denoted as ∆(s), is defined to
be the sum of s’s U-length with the U-lengths of all its ancestors.
3. The U-Height of a Deduction Tree is the maximum U-Depth value among its
leaves.
Some notation is needed to start our discussion. For any ordered pair (a, b) with
a > b ≥ 1, let Z denote an Normed(a, b) system, T denote a Z-Based Deduction
Tree, and β denote a branch of T. Let VAL( • ) denote a “valuation” function that
maps each parameter symbol u (appearing in the branch β ) onto an integer VAL(u),
satisfying the following two constraints:
I: Suppose a node s of the branch β introduces a new parameter symbol u via
one of Section 2’s ∃ quantifier Elimination rules. Then Item 2’s ∆(s) symbol
will satisfy the inequality:
(19)

Val(u) ≤ b · 2∆(s)

II: Every node-sentence s along the branch β will satisfy the following 3-part
condition:
II-a: If s is a Π∗1 sentence then it will possess an App∀(a) level of validity
under the valuation VAL.
II-b: If s is a Σ∗1 sentence then it will be App∃( b ) valid under VAL.
II-c: If s is a ∆∗0 sentence, then it will be a logically valid statement under the
valuation’s scheme for assigning an integer value VAL(u) to each parameter
symbol u. (This third requirement can be thought of as the intersection of
requirements II-a and II-b because their combination corresponds to II-c’s
requirement when a sentence contains absolutely no unbounded quantifiers.
This is because our definitions of App∀(c) and App∃(c) involves changing a
sentence’s unbounded quantifiers so that their ranges are bound by c , but it
implies no similar change in a bounded quantifier’s range.)
Henceforth, a node N in the deduction tree T will be called Positive(a,b) iff the union
of N ’s sentence with its ancestors in the deduction tree T satisfy the conditions I and

AN AXIOM SYSTEM THAT CAN VERIFY ITS OWN CONSISTENCY

23

II under some valuation VAL. Also, a root-to-leaf branch β will be called Positive(a,b)
when there exists a valuation VAL where all its nodes satisfy the conditions I and II.
L EMMA 1. For any a > b ≥ 1, let Z denote an Normed(a, b) system and T
denote a Z-Based Deduction Tree whose U-Height is less than Log2 a − Log2 b. Then
T possesses at least one Positive(a,b) branch.

P ROOF. The easiest manner to prove Lemma 1 is to first give an algorithm that constructs T’s Positive Branch and then to prove the correctness of this algorithm. Our algorithm for constructing this branch β and its valuation VAL from the input (a, b, T )
will be called Probe(a, b, T ). Its four steps are listed below:
1. The top node along the path β will always be T ’s root.
2. Suppose the first i nodes along the path β are N1 , N2 , ... Ni and Ni has two
children, denoted as Ne and Nf . In this case, the deduction tree T has used
either the ∨ or → Elimination rule to justify this binary split, and we will let
Ψe and Ψf denote the two sentences stored in these two nodes. The algorithm
Probe(a, b, T ) will make the “left child” Ne constitute the next element along
β’s path when the valuation VAL has Ψe satisfy condition II. Otherwise, it will
make Nf be β’s next node.
3. If the first i nodes in β’s path are N1 , N2 , ... Ni and Ni has only one
child, denoted as Ni+1 , then the algorithm Probe(a, b, T ) will “attempt” to make
Ni+1 into β’s next node. If Ni+1 introduces a new parameter symbol u, this
“attempted step” will also assign VAL( u ) the smallest integer value satisfying the Positive(a, b) condition (consistent with earlier assignments the valuation
VAL had already made). The proof that this “attempted extension” of β will
always successfully satisfy the Positive(a, b) condition has nine subcases, labeled
(a) through (i), appearing on the next several pages.
4. The procedure Probe(a, b, T ) will iteratively repeat Steps 2 and 3 to make the path
β become longer and longer until it reaches the tree’s leaf-level.
The remainder of our proof of Lemma 1 will be devoted to establishing that the
procedure Probe(a, b, T ) will successfully construct a Positive(a, b) branch when the
deduction tree T satisfies this lemma’s hypothesis. The Principle of Induction will be
employed to justify this claim. Our inductive proof shall assume that the first i nodes
N1 , N2 ...Ni along the path β satisfy the positive condition, and it will use this fact to
deduce Ni+1 is also positive. Our inductive proof will be divided into nine sub–cases
because we must separately consider the possibilities that Ni+1 is an axiom of Z
or is deduced via one of the eight Tableaux-style Elimination rules, that were formally
defined in Section 2.

24

DAN E. WILLARD

a. The Case where Ni+1 stores one of Z’s axioms. Any axiom trivially satisfies
Part-I of the definition of Positiveness (simply because it contains no parameter symbols u ). Moreover by definition, each axiom of an Normed(a, b) system automatically
satisfies Requirement II. 2
b. The Case where Ni+1 is generated by the “Unbounded Version” of the ∃Elimination Rule (i.e. Section 2’s Deduction Rule 5): This Elimination rule allows
Ni+1 to represent a sentence ψ(u∗ ), containing a new parameter symbol u∗ , when
an ancestor Nj of Ni+1 represents the sentence ∃v ψ(v). Since Nj can be inductively
presumed to satisfy Part II-b of the definition of Positiveness, it is immediately apparent
that u∗ can be assigned a valuation number VAL(u∗ ) enabling Ni+1 to also satisfy the
Positive(a, b) condition. 2
c. The Case where Ni+1 is generated by the “Bounded” type ∃ Elimination
Rule (i.e. Deduction Rule 6): This case is analogous to Item b, although it is more
complicated. In this case, an ancestor Nj of Ni+1 will represent the formal sentence
∃ v ≤ t ψ(v), and Ni+1 is a deduction from Nj introducing a new symbol u∗ and
storing the sentence u∗ ≤ t ∧ ψ(u∗ ). Let ∆ denote Ni+1 ’s U-Depth, and let L
denote Ni+1 ’s U-Length. Since Nj can be inductively presumed to satisfy Part I of the
definition of Positiveness and because Nj has a U-depth ≤ ∆−L, it follows that every
parameter symbol u1 , u2 , ... um appearing in Nj will satisfy VAL( ui ) ≤ b · 2∆−L .
In turn, this implies that VAL( t ) has an integer value no greater than b · 2∆ (because
t is constructed by taking input values no larger than b · 2∆−L and applying no more
than L iterations of growth-functions using these inputs — where the Double operation
is the fastest available growth function). Since Nj can be inductively assumed to
satisfy Part II-c of the definition of Positiveness and it is a sentence of the generic form
∃ v ≤ t ψ(v), we can certainly construct a valuation where VAL( u∗ ) ≤ b · 2∆ and
where VAL( u∗ ) assures that Ni+1 will consequently satisfy Parts I and IIc of the
Positive(a, b) condition. 2
d. The Case where Ni+1 is generated by the “Unbounded Version” of the
∀ Elimination Rule (i.e. Deduction Rule 7): This Elimination rule allows Ni+1
to represent a sentence φ(t), when an ancestor Nj of Ni+1 stores the sentence
∀v φ(v) and t represents a term in the U-Grounding language. Our Deduction Rule 7
further requires that each parameter symbol u, appearing in Rule 7’s term t , must be
previously introduced by an ancestor of Ni+1 , employing the ∃ Elimination Rule.
It is automatic from the last fact that Ni+1 will satisfy Part-I of the definition of
the Positiveness (simply because there are no new parameter symbols u introduced by
the ∀-Elimination Rule). To show that Ni+1 also satisfies the Part-II requirement, ∆
and L will again denote Ni+1 ’s U-Depth and U-Length. Then since t has no more
than L function symbols and no newly introduced parameter symbols, we can apply
Case (c)’s methodology to again conclude that VAL( t ) ≤ b · 2∆ (see footnote 2 ).
2 The same argument, as before, applies because each parameter symbol u inside t can again be inductively presumed to satisfy VAL(u) ≤ b · 2∆−L . This in turn implies VAL( t ) ≤ b · 2∆ because t

AN AXIOM SYSTEM THAT CAN VERIFY ITS OWN CONSISTENCY

25

Hence since T has a U-Height less than Log2 a − Log2 b, we get VAL( t ) ≤ a.
This last inequality, combined with the inductive assumption that Nj satisfies Part
II-a of Positive(a, b) condition, immediately implies Ni+1 also satisfies Part-II of the
definition of Positive(a, b). 2
e. The Case where Ni+1 is generated by the “Bounded Version” of the ∀ Elimination Rule (i.e. Deduction Rule 8): This case can be viewed as a degenerate version
of the Case (d) above, and it thus requires no proof.
f. The Case where Ni+1 is generated by the ∧ Elimination Rule: Trivial because a sentence Υ will automatically satisfy the Positive(a, b) Condition when some
ancestor of it storing the sentence Υ ∧ Γ does. 2
g. The Case where Ni+1 is generated by a ¬ Elimination Rule: It is, once
again, trivial that a sentence Υ will automatically satisfy the Positive(a, b) Condition
when some ancestor of it storing the sentence ¬ ¬ Υ does. Also, a similar easy argument applies to the other variants of the ¬ Elimination (formally defined by Section 2’s
Deduction Rule 2). 2
h. The Case where Ni+1 is generated by the ∨ Elimination Rule: This rule
introduces a pair of sibling nodes Υ and Γ when they have a common ancestor
Υ ∨ Γ. Since the inductive hypothesis implies Υ ∨ Γ satisfies the Positive(a, b)
Condition, one of Υ or Γ must also satisfy this condition. Our algorithm Probe will
automatically select this satisfying node. 2
i. The Case where Ni+1 is generated by the → Elimination Rule: Essentially the
same as the preceding Case h. 2
a
L EMMA 2. Again suppose a > b ≥ 1, that Z is a Normed(a, b) axiom system,
and that T denotes a Z-Based Deduction Tree. Then no Positive(a,b) Branch of Z’s
deduction Tree T can be “closed” by containing simultaneously some sentence Υ and
its negation.
P ROOF. Our proof of Lemma 2 will be a proof-by-contradiction. We will thus entertain the hypothesis that T has a closed Positive (a,b) branch containing simultaneously
some sentence Υ and its negation, and show that this assumption leads to a contradiction.
From the fact that all axioms in a Normed(a, b) system are Prenex* sentences of the
Π∗1 and Σ∗1 types, it follows that a branch can contain a sentence Υ and its strictly
encoded negation of the exact form “ ¬ Υ ” only when both Υ and ¬ Υ are ∆∗0
sentences (i.e. see footnote 3 ).
applies no more than L iterations of the doubling and addition functions to inputs whose initial sizes are
bounded by b · 2∆−L .
3 The classes of ∆∗ formulae were defined in Section 2. They consisted of any sentence all of whose
0
quantifiers were bounded. On the other hand, our defining conventions implied that if a sentence Υ was
Σ ∗1 or Π∗1 BUT NOT ∆∗0 , then it must contain one or more unbounded quantifier to the left of all other
logical symbols, including the “ ¬” symbol. This means that if Υ is either a proper Σ ∗1 or Π∗1 sentence,

26

DAN E. WILLARD

However, Part II-c of the definition of Positiveness indicates each ∆∗0 sentence, appearing in a Positive(a, b) branch, must be a valid statement under the branch’s valuation function. Hence, the concerned valuation must cause Υ and ¬ Υ to become
simultaneously valid.
The latter property of Υ and ¬ Υ is, of course, inherently infeasible. Hence, our
proof-by-contradiction has reached its goal because it has shown that it is infeasible for
T to possess a closed Positive(a,b) branch.
a
We will now prove our second theorem about the θ−Compactification property.
T HEOREM 2. . Semantic tableaux satisfies the θ−Compactification property when
θ = 14 .
P ROOF. Lemmas 1 and 2 will enable us to show that semantic tableaux satisfies Parts
(A) and (B) of the definition of θ−Compactification:

Demonstration that Semantic Tableaux Deduction satisfies Part (A) of the definition for θ−Compactification: Let us suppose — for the sake of establishing a
contradiction — that a Σ∗1 sentence Φ has a proof p ≤ d ab e + 1 from a
Normed(a, b) system α while Φ’s App∃( pθ · b ) interpretation is simultaneously
fallacious. Then p’s root will represent the negation of Φ rewritten in Prenex* form,
and this Π∗1 representation of ¬ Φ will be have an App∀( pθ · b ) validity level.
Let Z denote the axiom system that is the union of this Π∗1 representation for ¬Φ
with α. It is easy to verify that Z is a Normed( pθ · b , b ) system (see footnote 4 ).
Our next observation is rather technical. The Appendix A’s method for encoding
proof-trees, as well as any other reasonable encoding methodology, will clearly satisfy
Equation (20)’s inequality.
(20)

U-Height(p) <

1
Log2 (p)
5

Since Theorem 2’s hypothesis indicated that θ = 41 and Z was a Normed( pθ · b , b )
system, Equation (20) implies that the pair (p, Z) must consequently satisfy Lemma

then technically ¬ Υ is neither Σ ∗1 nor Π∗1 because a negation symbol appears to the left of its unbounded
quantifiers. Hence since no sentence along our explored branch β has a complexity higher than Σ∗1 or Π∗1
and because both Υ and ¬ Υ appear in this Positive(a,b) branch, the forced conclusion is that Υ is a ∆∗0
sentence.
4 The opening sentence of our proof assumed that p ≤ d a e + 1. Also, Theorem 2’s hypothesis
b
indicates θ = 14 . These identities imply pθ · b ≤ a. Since the opening sentence of our proof presumed
α was a Normed(a, b) system, this pθ · b ≤ a inequality implies α is also a Normed( pθ · b , b ) system.
Since ¬ Φ possesses an App∀( pθ · b ) level of validity when it is written as a Π∗1 sentence, the union of
¬ Φ with α must thus also be a Normed( pθ · b , b ) system.

AN AXIOM SYSTEM THAT CAN VERIFY ITS OWN CONSISTENCY

27

1’s hypothesis (i.e. see footnote 5 ). Hence, Lemma 1 implies that p must have a
positive branch.
From Lemma 2, this implies that such a branch of p will fail to be closed. Hence,
p cannot be a formal semantic tableaux proof (because at least one of its branches fails
to be “closed”). The latter observation brings our proof-by-contradiction to its desired
end by contradicting the initial assumption that p was a proof of Φ. 2
Demonstration that Semantic Tableaux Deduction satisfies Part (B) of the definition for θ−Compactification: This proof appears in Appendix B. Briefly summarized, it is roughly a permutation of the ideas from Part (A)’s proof — with the roles
of the universal and existential quantifiers now reversed. (As with Part (A)’s proof, the
main idea behind (B)’s proof rests on using the mathematical machineries of Lemmas 1
and 2 as the main underlying interim steps.)
a
T HEOREM 3. The ISD ( • ) mapping is a consistency-preserving transformation when
D denotes the semantic tableaux. (In other words, ISD (A) is automatically consistent
when all A’s Π∗1 theorems are valid in the standard model of the natural numbers.)
P ROOF. An immediate consequence of Theorems 1 and 2 because the latter result
shows ISD ( • ) satisfies the Theorem 1’s requirements for consistency preservation. a
R EMARK 5. (concerning the formal nature of Theorems 2 and 3): The meticulous
reader may have noticed that the proofs in this section relied upon some very exacting definitions for semantic tableaux deduction and for Π∗1 and Σ∗1 sentences. These
notation conventions were that:
I: The root in Φ ’s semantic tableaux proof was required to consist of the sentence
¬ Φ rewritten in Prenex∗ form. (This requirement was announced during Section 2’s formal definition of a semantic tableaux proof. Some but not all of the
prior literature has used a similar definition of a semantic tableaux that includes a
“Prenex Normalized” requirement for representing ¬ Φ. )
II: If Υ is a proper Σ∗1 formula then the formalized sentence “ ¬ Υ ” was technically viewed in our discussion as not constituting a formal Π∗1 sentence (because
a ¬ symbol had appeared to the left of its unbounded ∃−quantifiers.) However,
this formalized sentence “ ¬ Υ ” is clearly logically equivalent to a Π∗1 sentence. This type of strict definition for the Π∗1 and Σ∗1 classes helped simplify the
discussion in Footnote 3 of Lemma 2’s proof.
The notation conventions in I and II were used because they have simplified the structure
for the proofs of Lemma 2 and Theorem 2. They also obviously raise the following
natural question:
5 To verify that (p, Z) satisfies Lemma 1’s hypothesis, it is sufficient to ascertain that p ’s U-Height
satisfies the inequality of U-Height(p) < Log2 ( pθ · b ) − Log2 b = θ · Log2 p. The combination of
Theorem 2’s assumption that θ = 41 and Equation (20) immediately implies the validity of the claimed
U-Height(p) < θ · Log2 (p) inequality.

28

DAN E. WILLARD

∗ Would the results in Theorems 2 and 3 remain valid if Item I and II’s
particular notation conventions were dropped? After all, one would certainly
prefer these two propositions to be sufficiently robust so that they do not rely
upon such exacting assumptions?
The answer to ∗ is that the conventions used by I and II are indeed completely unnecessary. However, the formal proofs of Lemma 2 and Theorem 2 become significantly
simplified when the conventions I and II are employed. In particular, the Footnote 3 in
Lemma 2’s proof and the opening paragraphs in the Cases (A) and (B) of Theorem 2’s
proof gain pleasantly simpler structures when the conventions from Items I and II are
followed.

5.3. Formal Analysis of Tab−U1∗ −List Deduction. The ISD (A) axiom system of
Theorem 3 — with or without Remark 5’s added considerations — is already much
stronger than the IS(A) system of [67] because it has a capacity to recognize its semantic
tableaux self-consistency in a Level(1) rather than in a Level(0-) formalized sense. The
natural follow-up question is whether Theorem 3’s results can be possibly improved yet
further, beyond Remark 5’s proposed omitting of the Requirements I and II ?
On the positive side of the ledger, our research has found that Theorem 3 can be
strengthened by having D represent either Tab−U1∗ or Tab−Q∗1 −List deduction. These
strengthened versions of Theorem 3 are close to maximal effects, since the conventional
force of the Second Incompleteness Theorem takes place at the levels of both Tab−Σ∗2
or Tab−Π∗2 −List deduction [70].
For both Tab−U1∗ or Tab−Q∗1 −List deduction, the proofs of their generalizations of
Theorem 3 rests on a 2-step process that first shows these deduction methods satisfy the
θ−Compactification property and then uses Theorem 1 to finish the analysis. Our discussion will focus on Tab−U1∗ −List deduction because its formal analysis is pleasantly
shorter.
T HEOREM 4. Tab−U1∗ −List deduction satisfies the θ−Compactification property
when θ = 41 .
P ROOF. We will use the Principle of Induction to infer Theorem 4 from Theorem 2.
Let P denote the Gödel number of a sequence of pairs, (t1 , p1 ), (t2 , p2 ), ... (tn , pn ),
which constitute a Tab−U1∗ −List proof of a theorem Φ from a Normed(a, b) axiom
system called α. The formalism for θ−Compactification (given in Definition 5) indicates that this construct applies to any proof P which satisfies (21)’s inequality.
a
(21)
P ≤ d e + 1
b
Let Q denote the quantity defined below:
(22)

Q = b

P
c
pn

29

AN AXIOM SYSTEM THAT CAN VERIFY ITS OWN CONSISTENCY

A later step in our proof will use the fact that Equations (21) and (22) imply (23)’s
validity.
a
(23)
+ 1e
pn ≤ d
b ·Q
Our inductive construction is allowed to assume that each of the intermediate theorems of t1 , t2 , ... tn−1 have Tab−U1∗ −List proofs no larger than Q (because this
invariant holds under all typical encoding conventions, including the particular encoding method delineated in Appendix A). In this context, our proof-by-induction may
presume that for each integer i ≤ n − 1, the sentence ti will have
A: an App∃( Qθ · b ) level of validity when ti is a Σ∗1 sentence, and
a
B: an App∀( θ ) level of validity when ti is Π∗1 .
Q
The union of α with the sentences t1 , t2 , ... tn−1 is thus an Normed(
axiom system. Let us call this axiom system α∗ .

a
, Qθ · b )
Qθ

We will next use the fact that pn is the Gödel number of a semantic tableaux proof
from the axiom system α∗ of the theorem Φ. This fact combined with Theorem 2,
a
Equation (23) and α∗ ’s Normed( θ , Qθ · b ) property implies (via footnote 6 )
Q
that:
i: Φ has an App∃( ( Q · pn )θ · b ) level of validity when it is a Σ∗1 theorem,
a
ii: Φ has an App∀(
) level of validity when it is a Π∗1 theorem.
( Q · pn )θ
Since Equation (22) indicates P ≥ Q · pn , the invariants (i) and (ii) in turn imply:
A: Φ has an App∃( P θ · b ) level of validity when it is a Σ∗1 theorem,
a
B: Φ has an an App∀( θ ) level of validity when it is a Π∗1 theorem,
P
The latter two observations show that Tab−U1∗ −List deduction is θ−Compactified. a
T HEOREM 5. The ISD ( • ) mapping is a consistency-preserving transformation when
D denotes the Tab−U1∗ deduction method. (In particular, this means that ISD (A) is automatically consistent when all A’s Π∗1 theorems are valid under the standard model.)
a
, Qθ · b )
Qθ
axiom system. Also, Theorem 2 indicated that semantic tableaux deduction satisfied the θ−Compactification
property. From the formal description of this property (in Definition 5), it is apparent that every semantic
tableaux proof pn of a theorem Φ (from the axiom system α∗ ) shall automatically satisfy the invariants
(i) and (ii) when pn satisfies the inequality of:
6 The second paragraph in Theorem 4’s proof indicated that

α∗ was a Normed(

a
pn ≤ d b · Q
2θ e + 1

The final point is that Equation (23) and the fact that θ = 1/4 imply that pn does, in fact, satisfy the
above inequality. Hence, the above construction shows that invariants (i) and (ii) do hold. 2

30

DAN E. WILLARD

P ROOF. An immediate consequence of Theorems 1 and 4 because the latter result
shows that ISD ( • ) satisfies the Theorem 1’s requirements for consistency preservation.
a
R EMARK 6. A class of self-justifying statements, called the Tangibility Reflection
Principles, was defined in [67]. It is possible to hybridize our current results with [67]’s
formalism — so that Tab−U1∗ deduction can be incorporated into axioms systems verifying their tangibility principles. (These hybrids are also compatible with the Tab−Q∗1
and the other 1-deductive methods of Remark 1.) The details for constructing such hybrids are very lengthy. They are therefore not done here. Our article [67] explains why
the tangibility reflection principle is actually very useful.
R EMARK 7. This paper was submitted to the Journal of Symbolic Logic in August
of 2004, and we have not made any major changes in the manuscript since then except
essentially for responding to the referee’s suggestions, all of which were very helpful.
During the 9-month period following the submission of this manuscript, we continued working on this on-going research project, and found an interesting application of
Theorem 5’s formalism. This application requires a rather lengthy description, and its
characteristics are summarized by the conference announcement [71] and its accompanying full-length technical report. It essentially explains how if one changes the venue
of application from integer arithmetic to a computer’s floating point arithmetic environment, then Theorem 5’s ISD (A) formalism can formally recognize each of the computer
operations of addition, multiplication, subtraction and division as total functions among
computerized representations of real numbers. In particular, [71] views a real number as an ordered pair of bit-strings for representing the mantissa and exponent, and it
employs the usual computer hardware convention of rounding a real number after an
arithmetic operation so that the outputted mantissa will have a bit-length no larger than
the maximum of the lengths of the two input mantissas. This type of formalization of
floating point arithmetic, described more fully in [71], is useful for reminding ourselves
that there do exist certain particularized respects in which a self-justifying axiom system can recognize multiplication as a mathematically total function. Such applications
do not change the fact that ISD (A) cannot recognize integer multiplication as a total
function — and that our year-2002 paper [68] showed that no reasonable self-justifying
axiom system can overcome this obstacle. However, it does show that there are certain
types of computerized real-valued cousins of integer multiplication that ISD (A) can
recognize as formally total.
k,m
§6. The Inconsistency Property of NSD
(A). This section will have two parts.
k,m
Section 6.1 will explain the intuitive reason that the formalisms ISD (A) and NSD
(A)
have contrasting consistency properties. Section 6.2 will then provide a formal proof
k,m
that NSD
(A) is inconsistent for most inputs of (k, m, D, A).
k,m
6.1. The Intuitive Structural Difference Between the ISD (A) and NSD
(A)
k,m
Formalisms. Both the sentence Υ( k , m ) and the formal system NSD (A) were

AN AXIOM SYSTEM THAT CAN VERIFY ITS OWN CONSISTENCY

31

defined in Section 3. Thus, Equation (9) defined Υ( k , m ) to be the Σ∗1 sentence
k,m
“ ∃ z Log k (z) ≥ m ”. The Definition 3 of Section 3 gave NSD
(A) an identical
definition as ISD (A) except for the following changes:
k,m
a: NSD
(A)’s Group-zero schema contained the one additional axiom sentence of
Υ( k , m ).
k,m
b: NSD
(A)’s Group-3 axiom had an identical structure as ISD (A)’s Group-3 axk,m
iom — except that NSD
(A)’s Group-3 axiom was sensitive to the change that
k,m
was made by Item (a) above. Thus, the word “this” when NSD
(A)’s Group-3
axiom declared “This system is consistent” had a connotation that was sensitive
to the fact that the construct “this” referred to a system that includes the axiom
Υ( k , m ) within its scope.
k,m
A key point is that if one compares the formalisms ISD (A) and NSD
(A), both are
capable of proving the statement Υ( k , m ) as a theorem. Their only significant differk,m
ence is that the Group-3 axiom under NSD
(A) makes a stronger statement because its
usage of the word “this” has a connotation which treats Υ( k , m ) as being a formal
axiom (in addition to being a theorem).

This section will prove the counter-intuitive result that Theorem 5’s consistency preserk,m
vation property collapses under the NSD
( • ) mapping function, for most values of
(k, m, D). Essentially, this distinction will arise because the changed scope of the word
k,m
k,m
“this” under NSD
(A)’s Group-3 axiom will prevent NSD
(A) from satisfying Part-ii
of Section 1’s definition for introspective unification.
Underlying Nature of this Distinction: Let ζ(p) denote a function that maps an
k,m
initial proof p from the union of the Group 0, 1 and 2 axioms of NSD
(A) onto the
shortest proof of the same theorem from the Group 0, 1 and 2 axioms of ISD (A). Also,
the Definition 2 (from Section 3) had defined the symbol 2m
k . Using this notation, it
m
is apparent there exists a fixed constant C > 2k such that C assuredly bounds the
difference between the proof-lengths of p and ζ(p) when the deduction method D
k,m
used by the NSD
(A) and ISD (A) formalisms is the Tab−U1∗ deduction method.
In Proof Theory, two axiom systems typically have similar properties when their
proof lengths differ by only an additive constant. However, what is unusual about the
k,m
(A) is that:
particular systems ISD (A) and NSD
1. The fixed constant C > 2m
k separating these two proof lengths is an enormous
quantity.
2. As noted by the opening paragraph of this section, the meaning of the word “this”
k,m
in the Group-3 axiom sentences of ISD (A) and NSD
(A) is affected by Item
(1)’s distinction.
The complicated interaction between Items (1) and (2) is the reason why ISD ( • ) is
k,m
consistency preserving but NSD
( • ) is not. (In particular, a Kleene-like Group-3

32

DAN E. WILLARD

axiom has a different connotation when it refers to a short proof, referencing itself, than
k,m
when it refers to a long such proof.) The remainder of this section will prove NSD
(A)
is inconsistent for most inputs (k, m, D, A).

k,m
6.2. Formal Proof of NSD
(A)’s Inconsistency Property. Let Consα (n) be the
“finistic consistency statement” which declares that there is no proof of 0=1 from the axiom system α whose length is less than n. Both Friedman and Pudlák [14, 40, 43, 44]
have observed that for some constant  > 0, most consistent systems α require
a bit-length at least as large as O( n ) to prove Consα (n). These results do not
apply to all self-justifying axiom systems α that recognize addition but not multiplication as a total function. For instance, consider the possibility that n = 2bs ,
D denotes Tab−U1∗ −List deduction, α = ISD (A) and we encode Consα ( 2bs ) as:
“There exists no Tab−U1∗ −List proof p of 0=1 from ISD (A) satisfying the inequality
Log s (p) < b ”. Then ISD (A) is consistent, and it can use its Group-3 axiom to obtain
k,m
a significantly shorter than O( n ) sized proof of Consα ( 2bs ) . However, NSD
(A)
k,m
will have very different properties: We will formally prove that NSD (A) is inconsistent by employing a finistic consistency statement. Our discussion will employ the
following notation:

i: The symbol PA will denote Peano Arithmetic. The symbol PA+ will denote
the minor extension Peano Arithmetic that contains further function symbols for
Section 2’s U-Grounding language. (The footnote 7 explains why it is actually
k,m
permissible for the sub-component PA+ of the IS(PA+) and NSD
(PA+) systems to employ internally within itself a multiplication function symbol, provided
that it is remembered that the “Π+
1 theorems” of PA+, used by Equation (5)’s
Group-2 axioms, are forbidden from containing appearances of the multiplication
function symbol.)
ii: Subst ( g , h ) will denote Gödel’s well-known ∆∗0 substitution formula — which
yields TRUE when g is an encoding of a formula and h is an encoding of a sentence that replaces all occurrence of free variables in g with the Gödel-encoded
term g .
iii: f will denote the Gödel diagonalization sentence which states “There exists
no proof (using deduction method D ) of this sentence from the axiom system
k,m
NSD
(PA+)”.

7 The point is that Equation (5)’s formalization of the Group-2 axiom-scheme permits its axioms to use a
theorem Φ from the axiom system PA+ to transfer axiomatic information to the axiom system of IS(PA+)
k,m
or to NSD
(PA+) only when Φ does not violate the Π∗1 condition by containing Peano Arithmetic’s
multiplication function symbol. However, the formalism PA+ is certainly permitted to prove an intermediate
theorem Ψ , possessing some multiplication function symbols, that is subsequently applied to prove a further
Π∗1 theorem Φ, which will be employed by Equation (5)’s Group-2 axiom. (Such an action is permitted if
Φ ( unlike Ψ ) does not contain multiplication function symbols under the paradigm we describe.)

AN AXIOM SYSTEM THAT CAN VERIFY ITS OWN CONSISTENCY

33

iv: f(s, b) will denote the variant of Item (iii)’s Gödel sentence that applies to proofs
whose size is bounded by 2bs . It will formally state: “There exists no proof p (usk,m
ing deduction method D ) of this sentence from the axiom system NSD
(PA+)
b
which satisfies p < 2s ”.
To achieve our main results, it will be necessary that f(s, b) have a Π∗1 encoding. It is
easy to accomplish this. Thus, let Γ(g) denote the Π∗1 formula defined by Equation
(24), and let n denote (24)’s Gödel number. Then f(s, b) is formally defined to be
the Π∗1 sentence Γ( n ).
∀ p ∀ h { [ Subst(g, h) ∧ Log s (p) < b ] → ¬ PrfNSk,m ( P A+ ) (h, p) }

(24)

D

D EFINITION 6. The symbol CheckProof(t, p, q) will denote a ∆∗0 formula indicating
that the condition PrfNSk,m ( P A+ ) (t, p) is satisfied and that q represents a proof
D
(using deduction method D ) of Equation (25)’s statement from the axiom system
k,m
NSD
(PA+).
∃ p PrfNSk,m ( P A+ ) ( t , p )

(25)

D

Also, F (t, p) will denote the function, which given an input of (t, p) satisfying
PrfNSk,m ( P A+ ) (t, p), will produce the minimal integer q satisfying CheckProof(t, p, q).
D

L EMMA 3. There exists a constant C > 0, such that if q = F (t, p) then Definition 6’s function F will guarantee that Log(q) < O{ [ Log(p) ]C }.
Proof Sketch: The prior literature [1, 4, 8, 14, 20, 38, 40, 41, 50, 61, 64] has illustrated
several examples of a constant C, a Gödel-encoding method M and an axiom system
α such that if p is a M −encoded proof using α ’s axioms then there will exist a second
proof q satisfying Log(q) < O{ [ Log(p) ]C } such that q is a proof that p is a
M −encoded proof using α ’s axioms. An analogous construction will verify Lemma
k,m
3’s validity. In this case NSD
(PA+) is the employed axiom system, and Appendix A
formalizes the Gödel-encoding method. 2
C OROLLARY 1. There exists a constant a0 > 0, such that if a > a0 and if
k,m
p < 2ba−1 is a proof of an arbitrary theorem t from the axiom system NSD
(PA+)
b
then F (p, t) < 2a .
a

P ROOF. An immediate consequence of Lemma 3.

L EMMA 4. There exists a constant a0 > 0, such that if a > a0 then for any constant b, Equation (26)’s Π∗1 sentence is both true and provable from Peano Arithmetic.
∀ p ∀ n ∃ q < n { [ Loga−1 p < b ∧ Loga n ≥ b ∧ PrfNS k,m ( P A+ ) ( d f(a − 1, b) e , p ) ]
D

(26)

→ CheckProof( d f(a − 1, b) e , p , q ) }

34

DAN E. WILLARD

P ROOF. Equation (26)’s statement is a formalistic Π∗1 assertion whose logical content is identical to Corollary 1’s statement — for the special case where t represents
the sentence f(a − 1, b). Therefore, the logical validity of (26) is an immediate consequence of Corollary 1. Moreover, Peano Arithmetic can verify (26)’s statement because
it can formalize the proof of Corollary 1.
a
T HEOREM 6. For simplicity, let us assume D denotes the Tab−U1∗ −List deduction method (although this theorem will actually generalize for all cut-free deduction
methods such as semantic tableaux or Herbrand deduction). For each such deduction
method D, there will exist a constant k0 such that for every integer k > k0 , the
k,m
axiom system NSD
(PA+) is inconsistent.
On the Significance of Theorem 6 : There are several stronger versions of Theorem
6 than the variant above. In essence, we will focus on proving a relatively weak version
of this proposition because its proof is pleasantly shorter. The Remark 8, at the end
of this section, lists some stronger versions of Theorem 6. The contrast between their
negative results and Theorem 5’s positive result will be even sharper than that for the
particular variant proven below:
P ROOF. Our proof of Theorem 6 will have two parts. First, we will construct a proof
k,m
W of the Gödel sentence f(k − 1, m) from the axiom system NSD
(PA+). Then we
k,m
(PA+)
will analyze the length of W ’s proof and show it is short enough to force NSD
to become inconsistent.
Description of a 7-step Tab−U1∗ −List Proof of f(k − 1, m) (called “W”):
Lemma 4 had indicated that for any ordered pair (a, b) where a > a0 , Peano Arithk,m
metic can prove Equation (26)’s Π∗1 sentence. Since NSD
(PA+)’s Group-2 scheme
k,m
allows NSD
(PA+) to prove every Π∗1 theorem of Peano Arithmetic, it follows that
k,m
(PA+) can also prove (26). Applying this result in the particular case where
NSD
k,m
k = a , m = b and k is presumed to be larger than a0 , we obtain NSD
(PA+) can
certainly prove the statement:
∀ p ∀ n ∃ q < n { [ Logk−1 p < m ∧ Logk n ≥ m ∧ PrfNS k,m ( P A+ ) ( d f(k −1, m) e , p ) ]
D

(27)

→ CheckProof( d f(k − 1, m) e , p , q ) }

Let us next recall that Pair(x, y) denotes a ∆∗0 formula that is satisfied precisely when
x is the Gödel number of a Π∗1 sentence and y is the Gödel number of the sentence
that represents the negation of x ’s formal statement. Under this notation convention,
k,m
Equation (28) is certainly a logically valid statement. Moreover, NSD
(PA+) must be
able to prove the validity of Equation (28) (because its Groups 0 and 1 axioms endow
it with a capacity to prove every ∆∗0 sentence that is valid under the standard model of
the natural numbers.)
(28)

Pair( d f(k − 1, m) e , d ¬ f(k − 1, m) e )

AN AXIOM SYSTEM THAT CAN VERIFY ITS OWN CONSISTENCY

35

The hypothesis of Theorem 6 had focused on Tab−U1∗ −List deduction (essentially
for the sake of simplifying the current proof). This form of deduction consists of a
sequence of semantic tableaux proofs, where each proof establishes the validity of some
Π∗1 or Σ∗1 sentence that is allowed to be used in the subsequent further steps of the
Tab−U1∗ −List proof. In such a context, Equations (27) and (28) will represent the first
two intermediate results that our Tab−U1∗ −List proof shall deduce.
k,m
Let us next recall that NSD
(PA+)’s Group-3 axiom is identical to Equation (6)’s
formulation of ISD (A)’s Group-3 axiom, except that the relevant subscripts are now
k,m
k,m
changed from ISD (A) to NSD
(PA+). Thus, Equation (29) formalizes NSD
(PA+)’s
Group-3 axiom:
(29)
∀ x ∀ y ∀ p ∀ q ¬ [ Pair(x, y) ∧ PrfNS k,m ( P A+ ) (x, p) ∧ PrfNS k,m ( P A+ ) (y, q) ]
D

D

The third step in our proof W will establish the validity of Equation (30) as an immediate consequence of the combination of Equations (28) and (29).
(30)
∀p ∀q ¬ {PrfNS k,m (P A+) (df(k − 1, m)e, p) ∧ PrfNS k,m (P A+) (d¬f(k − 1, m)e, q) }
D

D

The fourth step of the proof W is mostly notational. The definitions of CheckProof
and f(k−1, m) imply that CheckProof( d f(k−1, m) e , p , q ) is logically equivalent
to Equation (30)’s curly bracket expression. Therefore, a fourth tableaux proof can
derive (31) as a consequence from (30).
(31)

∀ p ∀ q ¬ CheckProof( d f(k − 1, m) e , p , q )

Combining the intermediate results from Equations (27) and (31), our fifth semantic
tableaux proof will then derive the result of:
(32)
∀p ∀n ¬ {Logk−1 p < m ∧ Logk n ≥ m ∧ PrfNS k,m ( P A+ ) ( d f(k − 1, m) e , p )}
D

Since the axiom Υ( k , m ) (defined in Equation (9)) indicates the existence of an integer n satisfying Logk n ≥ m , a sixth semantic tableaux proof can now deduce (33)
from (32).
(33)

∀ p ¬ { Logk−1 p < m ∧ PrfNS k,m ( P A+ ) ( d f(k − 1, m) e , p ) }
D

Equation (33) is clearly equivalent to f(k − 1, m) ’s Gödel sentence. It is therefore
routine for a seventh tableaux proof to use Equation (33)’s intermediate result to arrive
at the deduction of f(k−1, m). The Tab−U1∗ proof, consisting of these seven semantic
tableaux subcomponents, is defined to be the formal proof called W.
Finishing the Proof of Theorem 6 by Analyzing the Formal Length of W ’s
k,m
Proof: The critical difference between the axioms systems ISD (A) and NSD
(PA+)
is that the latter formalism contained Equation (9)’s added Group-zero axiom, which
we denoted as Υ( k , m ). This axiom is technically unnecessary for deducing Equation
(33) from (32) (because if the axiom Υ( k , m ) was absent then our proof methodology

36

DAN E. WILLARD

could still derive Υ( k , m ) as a theorem). However, the point is that if Υ( k , m ) is a
formal axiom, then the resulting proof, deriving (33) from (32), is sharply shorter. As a
result of this proof compression, it is quite routine to obtain that there exists a constant
k0 such that every ordered pair (k, m) with k > k0 will automatically satisfy the
condition that the proof W (constructed above) has a Gödel number less than 2m
k−1 .
The latter observation will now enable us to complete the proof of Theorem 6. This
k,m
is because it shows that that NSD
(PA+) can prove the Gödel sentence f(k − 1, m)
with a proof whose length is so short — that the very existence of such a proof is
k,m
precluded by f(k − 1, m) ’s formal statement. Hence, the axiom system NSD
(PA+)
is inconsistent, as Theorem 6 had claimed.
a

R EMARK 8. (concerning stronger versions of Theorem 6): There are several stronger
versions of Theorem 6. They arise because as the values for k and m increase, this
chapter’s proof engine gains new applications. Among these stronger versions of Theorem 6 are:
1. A more sophisticated variant which indicates that if one increases the values of
k,m
(k, m) by a small amount then NSD
(PA+) will also be inconsistent when D
denotes semantic tableaux, Herbrand deduction or the cut-free version of the sequent calculus,
k,m
2. A variant of Theorem 6 which states NSD
(A) remains inconsistent when A
represents the empty axiom system (instead of PA+) and (k, m) is made sufficiently large. The footnote 8 explains why large enough values of (k, m) enable
Theorem 6 to generalize in this direction.
3. A third type of generalization of Theorem 6 where for each cut-free deduction
method D there exists a finite-sized non-growth axiom system A and a pair of
k,m
large enough intgers (k, m) where a modified form of NSD
(A), which drops
the two Group-zero axioms that had declared addition and doubling were total
k,m
functions, is inconsistent. Thus, this variant of NSD
(A) is inconsistent even
though it fails to recognize the assured existence of any integer larger than 2m
k .
Main Perspective: The broader significance of Theorems 5 and 6 is difficult to
appreciate until these two results are contrasted in detail. This is because the opposing
results of these two theorems are quite counter-intuitive — especially when their added
generalizations in Remarks 1, 6, 7 and and 8 are also contrasted.
8 The prior literature on weak axiom systems [20, 23, 34, 41, 52, 64] has noted that a good part of the force
of the Principle Induction applies to the set of integers lying within the ranges of well-defined Definable Cuts,
even when an axiom system does not recognize the formal validity of the Principle Induction. The proof of
Theorem 6 can be modified to gainfully employ this fact when (k, m) represents a large enough pair of fixed
constants. The net effect of this observation is that Theorem 6 will remain valid in the extremal case where
A represents the empty axiom system — provided the threshold values for k and m are appropriately
increased.

AN AXIOM SYSTEM THAT CAN VERIFY ITS OWN CONSISTENCY

37

Contrast Between Σ∗1 and Π∗1 Sentences: Let us recall that Section 3’s definition of
k,m
NSD
(A) involved adding a logically valid Σ∗1 sentence to ISD (A), called Υ( k , m ),
and then adjusting the Group-3 axiom to reflect this change. For any fixed sentence
k,m
Ψ, let ND (A, Ψ) denote the analog of NSD
(A) where the sentence added to Groupzero is Ψ (instead of Υ( k , m ) ), and the Group-3 “I am consistent” statement
k,m
is accordingly adjusted again. Although Theorem 6 showed NSD
(A) was typically
inconsistent, there is no analog of this inconsistency when Ψ is a logically valid Π∗1
sentence. Instead, Theorem 5’s opposing positive result can be generalized to show
that ND (A, Ψ) is always consistent when Ψ and all A ’s Π∗1 theorems are valid in the
standard model.
§7. Concluding Remarks. The two main results of this article are the opposing
positive and negative effects of Theorems 5 and 6. This subject matter should generate
scholarly interest — even if its main lasting significance is seen as only defining more
precisely the exact mathematical borderline that separates the Second Incompleteness
Theorem from its boundary-case exceptions.
The ISD (A) axiom system of Theorem 5 is stronger than the IS(A) system of our
prior article [67] in two respects. These are that 1) ISD (A) uses a Level(1) rather
than Level(0-) definition of self-consistency and 2) its mode of deduction replaces the
semantic tableaux methodology with the more flexible Tab−U1∗ −List approach.
As Remark 1 had noted, Theorem 5’s consistency property can be strengthened by
extending it from Tab−U1∗ to Tab−Q∗1 deduction. In essence, we opted for presenting
a simplified version of Theorem 5 because it was preferable to broaden the audience
for this paper through Section 5’s shorter form of presentation, rather than to offer its
strongest version.
k,m
The opposing result of Theorem 6 was that ISD (A)’s cousin, called NSD
(A), is inconsistent. This contrast is very surprising because the main difference between ISD (A)
k,m
and NSD
(A) is the connotation their respective Group-3 axioms associate with the
word “this”.

A more detailed commentary about ISD (A)’s significance has been provided by Remarks 2-4 at the end of Section 5.1. These remarks discuss several further respects in
which ISD (A) is a close-to-maximal variant of introspective formalism, whose additional strengthening is not feasible.
Also, Remark 2 explained how Section 5’s methodologies significantly simplifies the
proof techniques from [67], in addition to providing a stronger and more precise form
of result.
Before closing, it is also helpful to recall that the definitions for Σ∗1 and Π∗1 sentences
had allowed for an arbitrary combination of bounded quantifiers to appear to the right
of the unbounded quantifiers of a Σ∗1 and Π∗1 sentence. This condition is called the
unlimited-bounded-quantifier property. If our formalism had not incorporated this level

38

DAN E. WILLARD

of generality into the Tab−U1∗ −List deduction method, then the significance of Theorem 5’s ISD (A) axiom system could perhaps be interpreted as a much narrowed and
very restricted form of result.
However in a context where [70] has established that the Second Incompleteness
Theorem applies to both Tab−Σ∗2 and Tab−Π∗2 deduction, Theorem 5 can be proven to
be a very close to maximal result. This is because Tab−U1∗ −List’s modus ponens rule
is essentially the next weaker level of deduction available. It applies to every Σ∗1 and
Π∗1 sentence satisfying the previous paragraph’s unlimited-bounded-quantifier property,
rather than to a narrower subset of this generic class (i.e. see footnote 9 ).
Thus, the ISD (A) system provides an unusual combination of qualities. It is unconventional firstly because ISD (A) does not recognize integer-based multiplication as a
total function — a drawback whose consequences simply cannot be easily ignored —
even when Remark 7 noted that ISD (A) can recognize floating point multiplication as
a formally total function. Also, ISD (A)’s Group-3 axiom employs an unusual form
of restricted modus ponens principle. One reason ISD (A) should stimulate scholarly
interest, despite its clearly evident partial disadvantages, is because it possesses a type
of limited (and certainly not full) understanding of its own self-consistency — under
a definition of consistency that is applicable to the previous paragraph’s Level-1 styled
form of deduction.
The main reason for interest in ISD (A) is, of course, because it is always helpful to
consider unconventional boundary-case paradigms, to help sharpen one’s understanding
of great seminal theorems, such as for instance Gödel’s historic incompleteness result.
Our discussion has deliberately avoided speculations about the fuller epistemological
implications of self-justifying axiom systems, similar to ISD (A), because such implications are very complex — especially when all self-justifying systems which affirm
their own Level(0-) semantic tableaux consistencies are inherently unable [68] to prove
multiplication is a total function among integers. Instead, our goal has been to sharpen
the scholarly understanding of the Second Incompleteness Theorem’s meaning, by having the contrasting positive and negative results of Theorems 5 and 6 help identify the
mathematical threshold levels where this incompleteness theorem formally takes hold.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT: I thank the anonymous referee for many helpful suggestions about how to improve the presentation. I thank Robert Solovay for some telephone
conversation we had in 1994. In those conversations (see reference [52]), Solovay described to me the Theorem ∗, whose formal statement appears in Section 4. This theorem has been germane to my research, which has sought to both generalize Theorem ∗
and to find its main interesting boundary-case exceptions.
9 For instance, Theorem 5’s significance would be much narrowed if for some fixed constant K, it had
required that no more than K alternations of bounded universal and existential quantifiers can lie to the right
of the unbounded quantifiers of a Σ∗1 and Π∗1 sentence.

AN AXIOM SYSTEM THAT CAN VERIFY ITS OWN CONSISTENCY

39

Appendix A: Summary of Gödel Encoding Method. This appendix describes our
formal method for encoding Semantic Tableaux Proof trees and Tab−<−List proofs
as Gödel numbers. Our encoding scheme will be roughly analogous to the “natural Badic” encoding methods of Hájek-Pudlák [20] and Wilkie-Paris [64] — insofar as the
number of utilized bits to encode a semantic object will be approximately proportional
to the length of such an expression written by hand. This appendix will be somewhat
unnecessary because a reader should be able to appreciate the gist of our article without
examining a description of our Gödel encoding method. However in a context where
Sections 2–6 often allude to the “ Gödel encoding” of a syntactic object, it is clearly
helpful to summarize our encoding method.
Our scheme for encoding a semantic tableaux proof will use the following 24 language symbols:
1. The standard connective symbols of ∧, ∨, ¬, →, ∀ and ∃.
2. Two left and two right parenthesis symbols denoted as: ( , ) ( and ) .
3. Two symbols to represent the special constants of “0” and “1”.
4. Eight function symbols for representing for representing the eight formal U-grounding
functions of Addition, Doubling, Subtraction, Division, Logarithm, etc.
5. The relation symbols of “ = ” and “ ≤ ”.
6. The symbol V̂ for designating the presence of a basic variable v in a logical
sentence.
7. The symbol Û for designating the presence of a parameter constant u in a logical
sentence (which is produced by Section 2’s deduction rules 5 and 6 for eliminating
existential quantifiers).
Define a byte to be an unit consisting of six bits. We will think of a proof as either
comprising a sequence of bytes (or being an integer written in base 64). Each of the
24 symbols (above) will be given some unique 6-bit code, ranging between 32 and 55.
Our method for representing the presence of the i-th variable vi will be to encode it is
as a string of d log 32 (i + 1) e + 1 bytes, where the first byte is the “ V̂ ” symbol and
the remaining bytes encode i as a base-32 number, with the convention that the lead bit
in each byte’s 6-bit sequence is “0”. The same convention will be used to denote the
presence of the i-th parameter ui except its first byte will be the “ Û ” symbol.
Our notation has employed two types of parenthesis symbols because the first pair
of parenthesis symbols will have their usual meaning in punctuating a mathematical
sentence, whereas the latter pair of symbols ( and ) will separate the individual
sentences in a Semantic Tableaux proof tree. For example, consider a tree which stores
1) the sentence ψ1 as its root, 2) the sentences ψ2 and ψ3 as the root’s children, and
3) ψ4 as the child of ψ3 . There are several possible notation conventions for using the
( and ) symbols to encode a Semantic Proof tree. Our encoding convention will be
that ψi is an “ancestor” of ψj if and only if the range beginning with the parenthesis
to ψi ’s immediate left and continuing to the matching right parenthesis includes ψj .

40

DAN E. WILLARD

The example of our 4-node proof tree would thus be encoded as:
(34)

( ψ1 ( ψ 2 ) ( ψ 3 ( ψ4 ) ) )

The preceding paragraph summarized our method for encoding semantic tableaux
proofs. Its generalization for encoding of Tab−< proofs is straightforward. Thus if
p1 , p2 , ...pn collectively constitute a list of semantic tableaux proofs then the natural
concatenation of their byte strings will be the corresponding Tab−< proof.
This byte-styled encoding method is approximately analogous to what Wilkie-Paris
[64] have called a natural B-adic encoding or a similar counterpart in the Hájek-Pudlák
textbook [20]. Such compressed encodings are considered to be more meaningful and
efficient than an uncompressed encoding method, using say a Prime Number decomposition scheme [30] (because the latter has an unnecessarily long bit-length). All our
theorems would also be valid for uncompressed encoding methods. However, they are
more meaningful when one uses an efficiently compressed B-adic encoding method.
Appendix B: Demonstration that semantic tableaux satisfies Part (B) of the definition of θ−Compactification. The proof that semantic tableaux satisfies the Part-B
condition has been put into this appendix because it is similar to Section 5.2’s proof of
the Part-A condition.
The hypothesis of Theorem 2 had indicated that θ = 41 . Since our discussion will
employ a proof-by-contradiction, we will entertain the temporary hypothesis that the
Part-B condition is false. Then there must exist a Π ∗1 sentence Φ, that has a proof
p ≤ d ab e + 1 from a Normed(a, b) axiom system α where Φ’s App∀( paθ )
interpretation is fallacious. Then p’s root will be a Σ ∗1 sentence that represents the
a
negation of Φ, and it will possess an App∃( θ ) validity level.
p
Let Z denote the axiom system that is the union of this Σ∗1 representation of ¬Φ
a
with α. The footnote 10 proves Z is a Normed( a , θ ) system (by employing a
p
minor variation of the formalism that Section 5.2 used in Part-A’s proof.)
The footnote 11 shows that the the pair (p, Z) then must satisfy Lemma 1’s hypothesis. Hence, Lemma 1 will ascertain that p must possesses a positive branch.
a
≥ b holds because the first sentence of Footnote 4’s proof had proven the validity
pθ
θ
of the inequality: p · b ≤ a. The key point is that the combination of the fact that α is a Normed( a , b )
a
a
system and the
≥ b inequality imply α is also a Normed( a , θ ) system. Since the Σ∗1
pθ
p
a
representation of ¬ Φ possesses an App∃( θ ) level of validity, this implies that the union of ¬ Φ with
p
a
α is another Normed( a , θ ) system.
p
1
11 The combination of Equation (20), our assumption that
θ
=
and the equality
4
a
a
Log2 (a) − Log2 θ = θ · Log2 p immediately imply that U-Height(p) < Log2 (a) − Log2 θ . The
p
p
latter inequality shows that the the pair (p, Z) satisfies Lemma 1’s hypothesis.
10 We can assume

AN AXIOM SYSTEM THAT CAN VERIFY ITS OWN CONSISTENCY

41

We will now bring our proof-by-contradiction to a conclusion by employing Lemma
2. It indicates that such a positive branch of p cannot be closed. Hence, p cannot
be a semantic tableaux proof (because one of its branches remains open). This observation brings our proof-by-contradiction to its desired end by contradicting the initial
assumption that p was a proof of Φ. 2
REFERENCES

[1] Z. A DAMOWICZ, Herbrand consistency and bounded arithmetic, Fundamenta Mathematica, vol.
171 (2002), pp. 279–292.
[2] Z. A DAMOWICZ and T. B IGORAJSKA, Existentially closed structures and Gödel’s second incompleteness theorem, this J OURNAL, vol. 66 (2001), pp. 349–356.
[3] Z. A DAMOWICZ and P. Z BIERSKI, The logic of mathematics: A modern course in classical logic,
John Wiley and Sons, 1997.
[4]
, On Herbrand consistency in weak theories, Archive for Mathematical Logic, vol. 40 (2001),
pp. 399–413.
[5] T. A RAI, Derivability conditions on Rosser’s proof predicates, Notre Dame Journal on Formal Logic,
vol. 31 (1990), pp. 487–497.
[6] J. B ENETT, Ph.D. thesis, Princeton University, 1962, A detailed summary of Benett’s main theorem
can be found on pages 299–303 and 406 of the Hájek-Pudlák textbook [20].
[7] A. B EZBORUAH and J. C. S HEPHERDSON, Gödel’s second incompleteness theorem for Q, this J OUR NAL , vol. 41 (1976), pp. 503–512.
[8] S. R. B USS, Bounded arithmetic, Proof Theory Lecture Notes 3 (Bibliopolic), 1986, (Revised version
of Ph. D. Thesis.).
[9] S. R. B USS and A. I GNJATOVIC, Unprovability of consistency statements in fragments of bounded
arithmetic, Annals on Pure and Applied Logic, vol. 74 (1995), pp. 221–244.
[10] C. D IMITRACOPOULOS, Overspill and fragments of arithmetic, Archive for Mathematical Logic,
vol. 28 (1989), pp. 173–179.
[11] S. F EFERMAN, Arithmetization of mathematics in a general setting, Fundamenta Mathematica,
vol. 19 (1960), pp. 35–92.
[12] S. F EFERMAN , G. K RIESEL , and S. O REY, 1-consistency and faithful interpretations, Archive for
Mathematical Logic, vol. 6 (1962), pp. 52–63.
[13] M. F ITTING, First order logic and automated theorem proving, Springer, 1990.
[14] H. M. F RIEDMAN, On the consistency, completeness and correctness problems, Technical report,
Ohio State University Mathematics Department, 1979, Some summaries of these unpublished results by
Friedman can be found in [43, 50, 59, 62].
[15]
, Translatability and relative consistency, Technical report, Ohio State University Mathematics Department, 1979, Some summaries of these unpublished results by Friedman can be found in
[43, 50, 59, 62].
[16] K. G ÖDEL, ”Uber formal unentscheidbare sätse der principia mathematica und verwandte systeme,
Monatshefte für Math. Phys., vol. 37 (1931), pp. 349–360.
[17] P. H ÁJEK, On interpretability in set theory Part I, Com. Math. Univ. Carol, vol. 12 (1971), pp. 73–
79.
[18]
, On interpretability in set theory Part II, Com. Math. Univ. Carol, vol. 13 (1972), pp. 445–
455.
[19]
, Interpretability in theories containing arithmetic, Com. Math. Univ. Carol, vol. 22 (1981),
pp. 225–234.
[20] P. H ÁJEK and P. P UDL ÁK, Metamathematics of first order arithmetic, Springer Verlag, 1991.
[21] D. H ILBERT and P. B ERNAYS, Grundlagen der mathematic, Springer, 1939.
[22] R. G. J EROSLOW, Consistency statements in formal mathematics, Fundamenta Mathematica, vol.
72 (1971), pp. 17–40.
[23] R. K AYE, Models of peano arithmetic, Oxford University Press, 1991.
[24] S. C. K LEENE, On the notation of ordinal numbers, this J OURNAL, vol. 3 (1938), pp. 150–156.

42

DAN E. WILLARD

[25] J. K RAJ ÍCEK, Bounded propositional logic and complexity theory, Cambridge University Press,
1995.
, A note on proofs of falsehood, Archive for Mathematical Logic, vol. 1987 (26), pp. 169–
[26]
176.
[27] G. K REISEL and G. TAKEUTI, Formally self-referential propositions for cut-free classical analysis,
Dissertationes Mathematicae, vol. 118 (1974), pp. 1–55.
[28] P. L INDSTR ÖM, On faithful interpretability, Computation and proof theory, vol. 1104, Springer
Lecture Notes in Mathematics, 1984, pp. 279–288.
[29] M. H. L ÖB, A solution to a problem by Leon Henkin, this J OURNAL, vol. 20 (1955), pp. 115–118.
[30] E. M ENDELSON, Introduction to mathematical logic, Chapman Hall, 1997.
[31] R. M ONTAGUE, Theories incomparable with respect to interpretability, this J OURNAL, vol. 27
(1962), pp. 195–211.
[32]
, The continuum of relative interpretability, this J OURNAL, vol. 1958 (23), pp. 494–511.
[33] J. M YCIESLSKI, A lattice connected with relative interpretability, Notices of AMS, vol. 9 (1962),
pp. 407–408.
[34] E. N ELSON, Predicative arithmetic, Princeton Math Notes Press, 1986.
[35] S. O REY, Relative interpretations, Zeitscrfit fur Math Logic, vol. 7 (1961), pp. 146–153.
[36] R. PARIKH, Existence and feasibility in arithmetic, this J OURNAL, vol. 36 (1971), pp. 494–508.
[37] J. B. PARIS and C. D IMITRACOPOULOS, A note on the undefinability of cuts, this J OURNAL, vol. 48
(1983), pp. 564–569.
[38] J. B. PARIS and A. J. W ILKIE, ∆0 sets and induction, Proceedings of the Jadswin logic conference,
Leeds University Press, 1981, pp. 237–248.
[39] P. P UDL ÁK, Some prime elements in the lattice of interpretability, Transactions of the AMS, vol. 280
(1983), pp. 255–275.
[40]
, On lengths of proofs of finisitic consistency statements in first order theories, Logic colloquium 84, North Holland, 1984, pp. 165–196.
[41]
, Cuts, consistency statements and interpretations, this J OURNAL, vol. 50 (1985), pp. 423–
442.
[42]
, Improved bounds on the lengths of proofs of finistic consistency statements, AMS Contemporary Mathematics Series, vol. 65 (1987), pp. 309–331.
[43]
, On the lengths of proofs of consistency, Collegium logicum: Annals of the kurt gödel,
vol. 2, Springer-Wien, 1996, pp. 65–86.
[44]
, The lengths of proofs, The handbook of proof theory, North Holland, 1998, pp. 547–636.
[45] Z. R ATAJCZYK, Subsystems of true arithmetic and hierarchies of functions, Annals on Pure and
Applied Logic, vol. 64 (1993), pp. 95–152.
[46] H. A. ROGERS, Recursive functions and effective compatibility, McGraw Hill, 1967.
[47] J. B. ROSSER, Extensions of some earlier theorems by Gödel and Church, this J OURNAL, vol. 1
(1936), pp. 87–91.
[48] S. S ALEHI, Herbrand consistency in arithmetics with bounded induction, Ph.D. thesis, Polish Academy, 2001.
[49] C. A. S MORY ŃSKI, The incompleteness theorem, Handbook on mathematical logic, North Holland,
1977, pp. 821–865.
[50]
, Non-standard models and related developments, Harvey friedman’s research in the foundations of mathematics, North Holland, 1985, pp. 179–220.
[51] R. M. S MULLYAN, First order logic, Springer Verlag, 1968.
[52] R. M. S OLOVAY, Several private telephone communications during April of 1994 describing Solovay’s generalization of one of Pudlák’s theorems [41], using the additional formalisms of Nelson and WilkiParis [34, 64]. Solovay never published this result (which we call Theorem ∗ in Section 4) or any of his other
observations about “Definable Cuts” that several logicians [20, 25, 34, 37, 41, 43, 44, 61, 64] have attributed
to his private communications. To help acquaint unfamiliar readers with this subject, the Appendix A of [67]
provides a short 4-page interpretation summarizing approximately how the Theorem ∗ can be thought of as
arriving from the joint research of Nelson, Pudlák, Solovay and Wilkie-Paris.
[53] R. M S OLOVAY, Injecting inconsistencies into models of PA, Annals on Pure and Applied Logic,
vol. 44 (1988), pp. 102–132.
[54] V. S VEJDAR, Degrees of interpretability, Com. Math. Univ. Carol, vol. 19 (1978), pp. 783–813.

AN AXIOM SYSTEM THAT CAN VERIFY ITS OWN CONSISTENCY

43

[55]
, Modal analysis of generalized Rosser sentences, this J OURNAL, vol. 48 (1983), pp. 986–
999.
[56] G. TAKEUTI, Proof theory, North Holland, 1987.
[57]
, Gödel sentences of bounded arithmetic, this J OURNAL, vol. 65 (2000), pp. 1338–1346.
[58] A. TARSKI , A. M OSTOWSKI , and R. ROBINSON, Undecidable theories, North Holland Press, 1953.
[59] A. V ISSER, Interpretability logic, Mathematical Logic: Proceedings of the Heyting Summer School,
1988, pp. 175–208.
[60]
, An inside view of exp, this J OURNAL, vol. 57 (1992), pp. 131–165.
[61]
, The unprovability of small inconsistency, Archive for Mathematical Logic, vol. 32 (1993),
pp. 131–165.
[62]
, Faith and falsity, Annals on Pure and Applied Logic, (2006), to appear.
[63] P. VOP ĚNKA and P. H ÁJEK, Existence of a generalized semantic model of Gödel-Bernays set theory,
Bulletin de l’Academie Polonaise des Sciences,Mathmatiques, Astromiques et Physiques, vol. 12 (1973),
pp. 1079–1086.
[64] A. J. W ILKIE and J. B. PARIS, On the scheme of induction for bounded arithmetic, Annals on Pure
and Applied Logic, vol. 35 (1987), pp. 261–302.
[65] D. W ILLARD, Self-verifying axiom systems, Springer Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 713
(1993), pp. 325–336, (Proceedings of the Third Kurt Gödel’s Symposium).
[66]
, The semantic tableaux version of the second incompleteness theorem extends almost to
Robinson’s arithmetic Q, Springer Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 1847 (2000), pp. 415–430,
(“Tableaux-2000” Conference Proceedings).
[67]
, Self-verifying systems, the incompleteness theorem and the tangibility reflection principle,
this J OURNAL, vol. 66 (2001), pp. 536–596, See also [65] for a shorter 12-page conference-stye paper that
summarizes the intuition behind the IS(A) axiom system, without formal proofs.
[68]
, How to extend the semantic tableaux and cut-free versions of the second incompleteness
theorem almost to Robinson’s arithmetic Q, this J OURNAL, vol. 67 (2002), pp. 465–496, (See also [66] for
the earlier more compressed conference version of this paper. It differs from our journal article by having a
substantially less rigorous but more informal style of presentation.).
[69]
, Some new exceptions for the semantic tableaux version of the second incompleteness theorem, Springer Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 2381 (2002), pp. 281–297, (“Tableaux-2002” Conference Proceedings).
[70]
, A version of the second incompleteness theorem for axiom systems that recognize addition
but not multiplication as a total function, First order logic revisited (Berlin) (V. Hendricks et. al., editor),
Logos Verlag (conference met in 2003 – prior to the publication of its Proceedings), July 2004, pp. 337–368.
[71]
, On two partial (and not full) respects where an axiom system can recognize its own consistency and multiplication as a total function, 2005, a presented talk at the summer ASL-2005 conference in
Athens whose 300-word abstract will be publised in the Bulletin of Symbolic Logic and which is described in
further detail in an University of Albany technical report.
, A new variant of Hilbert styled generalization of the second incompleteness theorem and
[72]
some exceptions to it, Annals on Pure and Applied Logic, (2006), A 200-word abstract summarizing the
contents of this forthcoming invited article can be found on the web-site of The 2nd St. Petersburg Conference on Logic and Computability (2003), i.e. http://logic.pdmi.ras.ru/2ndDays or in the Atlas Mathematical
Conference Abstracts.
[73] C. W RATHALL, Rudimentary predicates and relative computation, Siam Journal on Computing,
vol. 7 (1978), pp. 194–209.
DEPARTMENT OF COMPUTER SCIENCE
UNIVERSITY OF ALBANY
ALBANY, NY 12222, USA

E-mail: dew@cs.albany.edu
URL: http://www.cs.albany.edu/ ∼ dew

