Some Specially Formulated Axiomizations for
IΣ0 Manage to Evade the Herbrandized
Version of the Second Incompleteness
Theorem

Dan E. Willard
More polished version in Information and Computation 207 (2009) pp. 1078-1093.

Abstract
In 1981, Paris and Wilkie [28] indicated it was an open question whether IΣ0 would
satisfy the Second Incompleteness Theorem for Herbrand deduction. We will show
that some specially formulated axiomizations for IΣ0 can evade the Herbrandized
version of the Second Incompleteness Theorem.
Key words: Gödel’s Second Incompleteness Theorem, Herbrand Consistency
MSC: 03B52; 03F25; 03F45; 03H13

1

Introduction

Gödel’s Second Incompleteness Theorem [11] asserts that neither Peano
Arithmetic, nor any consistent extension of it, can prove a theorem affirming
its own self-consistency under Hilbert deduction. There have been numerous
generalizations and extensions of Gödel’s seminal result [1–4,6–9,15,19,23,24,28,30–
36,38,41,40,43,44,46,48,50,52,54]. For example, Solovay [36] has combined the
work of Nelson, Pudlák and Wilkie-Paris [25,31,46] to establish that essentially
no axiom system that recognizes Successor(x) = x + 1 as a total function
(and which treats addition and multiplication as 3-way relations) can prove
a theorem affirming its own consistency under the conventional paradigm of
Hilbert deduction.
1

Email=dew@cs.albany.edu. This research was partially supported by NSF Grant
CCR 99-02726

Preprint submitted to Elsevier

8 February 2013

In 1981, Paris and Wilkie [28] noticed that it was an open question whether
the axiom system IΣ0 did satisfy the Second Incompleteness Theorem for
semantic tableaux and Herbrand deduction. Interestingly at the same time,
Paris-Wilkie observed that there was an available solution to this problem for
Hilbert deduction. Thus, IΣ0 +Exp is unable to prove the Hilbert consistency of
even an axiom system as simple as Q [46]. Subsequently. Adamowicz-Zbierski
[1,3] showed that IΣ0 +Ω1 was unable to verify its Herbrand consistency, and
Willard [48,50] developed an alternate variant of the Adamowicz-Zbierski formalism that showed at least one type of natural encoding of the IΣ0 axiom
system would satisfy the semantic tableaux version of the Second Incompleteness Theorem.
On 16 November 2005, we received a fascinating email communication from
L.A. Kolodziejczyk about this subject (which were an outgrowth out of some
conversations he had with Zofia Adamowicz and Konrad Zdanowksi). It observed that there are two natural formalisms for axiomatizing IΣ0 , henceforth
called Ax-1 and Ax-2. Both shall take the Tarski-Mostowski-Robinson axiom
system Q as their starting base. In a context where φ(x, y) is a ∆0 formula,
these formalisms will use respectively Equations (1) and (2) to denote their
induction schemes.
∀x { { φ(x, 0) ∧ ∀y [ φ(x, y) =⇒ φ(x, y 0 ) ] } =⇒ ∀y φ(x, y) } (1)
∀x ∀z { { φ(x, 0) ∧ ∀y ≤ z [ φ(x, y) =⇒ φ(x, y 0 ) ] } =⇒ ∀y ≤ z φ(x, y) } (2)
Kolodziejczyk noticed that logically equivalent axiom systems, such as Ax-1
and Ax-2, do not necessarily have the same properties with regards to the
semantic tableaux and Herbrandized versions of the Second Incompleteness
Theorem. Thus, Kolodziejczyk’s email asked whether [50]’s semantic tableaux
version of the Second Incompleteness Theorem will generalize for Ax-2’s unconventional induction scheme? It also inquired to what extent are generalizations of the Second Incompleteness Theorem germane to Herbrand deduction?
One reason the second question is especially intriguing is that Kolodziejczyk
demonstrated in [18,19] that there exists bounded arithmetics where Herbrand
consistency and tableaux consistency are provably not logically equivalent.
One part of our answer to this question had appeared in the separate paper [55]. It explained how our prior results about Ax-1’s semantic tableaux
incompleteness properties have direct generalizations for Ax-2.
A second type of answer to Kolodziejczyk’s stimulating open question will
appear in this paper. We will prove that there is a third type of axiomization
of IΣ0 , called Ax-3, which is logically equivalent to Ax-1 and Ax-2, but which
has the property that an extension of Ax-3 is capable of recognizing its own
Herbrand consistency.
2

This last result is likely to raise almost as many questions as it does answer.
This is because there are many potential logically equivalent axiomizations for
IΣ0 . Thus, one may ask for which potential particular axiomizations α for
IΣ0 do the Questions (1) and (2) below have a positive answer?
(1) Are all extensions of α ’s axiomization for IΣ0 unable to prove a theorem
verifying their own semantic tableaux consistency?
(2) Likewise, are all extensions of α ’s axiomization for IΣ0 unable to prove
a theorem verifying their own Herbrand consistency?
Since the Second Incompleteness Theorem generalizes for most types of axiom
systems, it is of course reasonable to conjecture that most of the answers
to the Questions 1 and 2 (above) will be in a positive direction. However,
the point of this article is that an automatic “yes” response to Questions
1 and 2 cannot be always secured. Thus, Kolodziejczyk [18,19] has shown
that Herbrand consistency and semantic tableaux consistency are not always
equivalent to each other, and the current article will actually construct a
particular formalization of IΣ0 , called Ax-3, that manages to evade at least
Question 2’s Herbrandized version of the Second Incompleteness Theorem.

2

The Definition of a New Version of IΣ0

This section will define the Ax-3 axiomatization for IΣ0 and provide the
formal statement of our main theorem (which will be subsequently proven in
Sections 3 and 4). As the reader examines the formal definitions in the current
section, it should be kept in mind that Ax-3 was deliberately endowed with an
unconventional method for axiomatizing IΣ0 so that its formalism will evade
the Herbrandized version of the Second Incompleteness Theorem. (Moreover
because of a technical difference between the definitions of Herbrand consistency and semantic tableaux consistency, it should be kept in mind that
Ax-3’s evasion of the Second Incompleteness Theorem under a Herbrandized
definition of consistency does not generalize for semantic tableaux deduction.)
In our discussion, a formula will be called ∆R
0 iff it has a structure similar
to a ∆0 formula (appearing in for example the Hájek -Pudlák textbook [13])
except that its bounded quantifiers, “ ∀ v ≤ T ” and “ ∃ v ≤ T, ”, are
now disallowed from using the conventional arithmetic functions of addition
and multiplication in their terms T . Instead, the terms of a ∆R
0 formula
will employ only the maximum function as the only permissible operator to
define a variable’s bounded range. (Arithmetic functions are allowed to appear
elsewhere in the body of a ∆R
0 formula.) Thus, Equation (3) is an example
3

R
of a ∆R
0 formula, and (4) is an example of a ∆0 formula that is not ∆0 .

∀ p ≤ Max(x, y) [ ( p + y ≤ x + 2 ∗ y) ∨ ( p ∗ y ≤ y ∗ y ∗ y ) ] (3)
∀ p≤ x∗y

[ ( p + y ≤ x + 2 ∗ y) ∨ ( p ∗ y ≤ y ∗ y ∗ x ) ]

(4)

Let us say a formula is ΠR
1 iff it can be written as ∀ v1 ∀ v2 ... ∀ vn φ(v1 , v2 , ... , vn )
where φ(v1 , v2 , . . . , vn ) is a ∆R
0 formula. Each of Ax-1, Ax-2 and Ax-3 will
contain a common set of nine ΠR
1 axioms, called Q0 and listed below. The
main purpose of Q0 will be to define the constructs of addition, multiplication, integer-successor, maximum and also = and ≤.
1 = 00 ∧ 2 = 10 ∧ 0 = 0 ∧ 00 6= 0 ∧ 0 ≤ 0 ∧ ¬ [ 00 ≤ 0 ] (5)
∀ x ( x+0 = x ∧ x·0 = 0 ∧ x·1 = x )

(6)

∀x ∀y ( x0 = y 0 ⇐⇒ x = y )

(7)

∀x ∀y ( x ≤ y ⇐⇒ ( x0 ≤ y ∨ x = y )

(8)

∀x ∀y

x · y 0 = (x · y) + x

∀x ∀y ∀z

[x=y ∧ y=z ] ⇒ [x=z ∧ z=x]

(10)

∀x ∀y ∀z

[x=y ∧ y≤z ] ⇒ x≤z

(11)

∀x ∀y ∀z

[x=y ∧ z≤y ] ⇒ z≤x

(12)

∧

x + y 0 = (x + y)0

(9)

∀x ∀y ( x ≤ y ⇒ Max(x, y) = y ) ∧ ( y ≤ x ⇒ Max(x, y) = x )(13)

In the context of the above definition for Q0 , the Ax-1 and Ax-2 formalisms
will be respectively defined as the union of Q0 with all the instances of the
respective induction schemes in Equations (1) and (2), where φ(x, y) is a ∆0
formula. Similarly, I∆R
0 will be defined as the union of Q0 with all instances
of Equation (2)’s induction schemas where φ(x, y) is ∆R
0.
This paragraph will define a set of ΠR
1 sentences, called Trivial-R, that has
R
the property that I∆0 + Trivial-R proves the same set of theorems as the more
conventional Ax-1 and Ax-2 axiomatization for IΣ0 . In our discussion, a tuple
(a0 , a1 , a2 , . . . , aN ) is called a Split Representation of an non-negative
integer x when the following condition is satisfied:
x =

N
X

ai ∗ (a0 + 1)i−1 AND a1 ≤ a0 ∧ a2 ≤ a0 ∧ ... aN ≤ a0 (14)

i=1

4

For a fixed integer N , let SplitN ( x , a0 , a1 , . . . , aN ) denote a ∆R
0 formula
indicating (14) is satisfied.
For each of the arithmetic operators of + , ∗ , Max, = and ≤, the axR
iom system Trivial-R will have available a family of ∆R
0 predicates and Π1
axioms for simulating the operations of these functions when they manipulate Split Representations of integers. Thus for a fixed triple (I, J, K),
let MultI,J,K (a0 , a1 , ..., aI , b0 , b1 , ..., bJ , c0 , c1 , ..., cK ) designate a ∆R
0 predicate
simulating the action of integer multiplication when its input is the two split
integers of (a0 , a1 , . . . , aI ) and (b0 , b1 , . . . , bJ ) and its resultant is the
multiplicative product of (c0 , c1 , . . . , cK ). The accompanying ΠR
1 axiom of
Trivial-R that formalizes this predicate will be:

∀ x ∀ y ∀ z ∀ a0 ∀ a1 ... ∀ aI ∀ b0 ∀ b1 ... ∀ bJ ∀ c0 ∀ c1 ... ∀ cK
{ [ SplitI (x, a0 , ... , aI ) ∧ SplitJ (y, b0 , ... , bJ ) ∧ SplitK (z, c0 , ... , cK ) ] =⇒
[ x∗y =z

⇐⇒ MultI,J,K (a0 , ... , aI , b0 , ... , bJ , c0 , ... , cK ) ] } (15)

Likewise, Trivial-R will have available analogs of Equation (15) to simulate addition, maximum, equality, and less-than-or-equals among split integers. Thus,
the predicates of AddI,J,K (a0 , a1 , . . . , aI , b0 , b1 , . . . , bJ , c0 , c1 , . . . , cK ),
MaximI,J,K (a0 , a1 , . . . , aI , b0 , b1 , . . . , b, c1 , . . . , cK ), EqI,J (a0 , a1 , . . . , aI , b0 , b1 , . . . , bJ )
I,J,K
and LTEI,J (a0 , a1 , . . . , aI , b0 , b1 , . . . , bJ ) will be the ∆R
0 analogs of Mult
for these four structural relations. Their counterparts of Equation (15)’s formal
axiom will then be:

∀ x ∀ y ∀ z ∀ a0 ∀ a1 ... ∀ aI ∀ b0 ∀ b1 ... ∀ bJ ∀ c0 ∀ c1 ... ∀ cK
{ [ SplitI (x, a0 ...aI ) ∧ SplitJ (y, b0 ...bJ ) ∧ SplitK (z, c0 ...cK ) ]
[ x+y =z

=⇒

⇐⇒ AddI,J,K (a0 ...aI , b0 ...bJ , c0 ...cK ) ] }

(16)

∀ x ∀ y ∀ z ∀ a0 ∀ a1 ... ∀ aI ∀ b0 ∀ b1 ... ∀ bJ ∀ c0 ∀ c1 ... ∀ cK
{ [ SplitI (x, a0 ...aI ) ∧ SplitJ (y, b0 ...bJ ) ∧ SplitK (z, c0 ...cK ) ]
[ z = Max(x, y)

=⇒

⇐⇒ MaximI,J,K (a0 ...aI , b0 ...bJ , c0 ...cK ) ] } (17)

5

∀ x ∀ y ∀ a0 ∀ a1 ... ∀ aI ∀ b0 ∀ b1 ... ∀ bJ
=⇒ [ x = y

⇐⇒ EqI,J (a0 ...aI , b0 ...bJ ) ]

∀ x ∀ y ∀ a0 ∀ a1 ... ∀ aI ∀ b0 ∀ b1 ... ∀ bJ
=⇒ [ x ≤ y

[ SplitI (x, a0 ...aI ) ∧ SplitJ (y, b0 ...bJ ) ]
(18)

[ SplitI (x, a0 ...aI ) ∧ SplitJ (y, b0 ...bJ ) ]

⇐⇒ LTEI,J (a0 ...aI , b0 ...bJ ) ]

(19)

Henceforth, Ax-3 will denote the axiom system I∆R
0 + Trivial-R. Section 3
will prove that Ax-3 proves the same set of theorems as Ax-1 and Ax-2.

Definition 1: Let α ⊇ β denote that α’s set of formal axioms includes
all β ’s axioms. (This definition of “ ⊇ ” is stronger than the more modest
construct that α proves all β ’s theorems.) Also assuming α denotes a consistent axiom system and D denotes a deductive method, (α, D) will be
called a Threshold for the Second Incompleteness Effect iff all consistent
extensions α∗ ⊇ α have the property that α∗ is unable to prove the consistency of its proofs using deduction method D. Otherwise, (α, D) will be called
an Anti-Threshold. (It means that some consistent α∗ ⊇ α can prove a
theorem affirming its own consistency under deduction method D.)

Using Definition 1’s notation, the main theorem proven in this article will
be that Ax-3 is an anti-threshold for the Herbrandized version of the Second
Incompleteness Theorem. This means that there must assuredly exist some
consistent system α∗ ⊇ Ax-3, where α∗ can prove a theorem affirming its
own Herbrand consistency.

3

Basic Framework and Underlying Intuition

This section will have two purposes. It will formally prove Ax-3 proves
the same set of theorems as Ax-1 and Ax-2, thus establishing that Ax-3 is a
permissible formal means for axiomatizing IΣ0 . It will also provide an intuitive
explanation of why Ax-3 is able to evade the Herbrandized version of the
Second Incompleteness Theorem (by satisfying Definition 1’s “anti-threshold”
property for Herbrand consistency).
Theorem 1 Each of Ax-1, Ax-2 and Ax-3 prove the same set of theorems.
6

Proof Sketch: It is well known Ax-1 and Ax-2 prove the same set of
theorems. Thus to establish Theorem 1, we need only show Ax-2 and Ax-3.
also prove the same set of theorems.
Our proof will use the fact that Paris and Dimitracopoulos [26] have observed that in a model-theoretic sense, there is a 1-to-1 correspondence between ∆0 formulae and their equivalent representations in a ∆R
0 form. Let
R
ψ(x, y) denote an arbitrary ∆0 formula. The Paris and Dimitracopoulos [26]
result easily implies that for any integer k, it is possible to construct a ∆R
0
formula ψ ∗ (x, y0 , y1 , . . . , yk ) that is its logical counterpart of ψ(x, y) under
split representations for an integer. More precisely, it implies that one can map
∗
ψ(x, y) onto a ∆R
0 formula ψ (x, y0 , y1 , . . . , yk ) such that the Ax-2 and Ax-3
representations of IΣ0 can both trivially prove the following property:
∀ x ∀ y ∀ y0 ∀ y1 ... ∀ yk

{ Splitk (y, y0 , y1 , . . . , yk ) =⇒ [ ψ(x, y) ⇐⇒ ψ ∗ (x, y0 , y1 , . . . , yk ) ] } (20)
Let SizeL (y0 , y1 , . . . , yk ) denote a ∆R
0 formula indicating that (y0 , y1 , . . . , yk )
represents an integer ≤ L. Then it is not hard to show that Ax-3 can use
its Trivial-R axioms to prove that the two ∆0 formulae of ∃y ≤ xk ψ(x, y)
and ∀y ≤ xk ψ(x, y) are equivalent to the respective ∆R
0 formulae of:
∃ y0 ≤ x ∃ y1 ≤ x ... ∃ yk ≤ x Sizexk (y0 , y1 , ... , yk ) ∧ ψ ∗ (x, y0 , y1 , ... , yk ) (21)
∀ y0 ≤ x ∀ y1 ≤ x ... ∀ yk ≤ x Sizexk (y0 , y1 , ... , yk ) ⇒ ψ ∗ (x, y0 , y1 , ... , yk ) (22)
Thus by essentially applying n iterations of this technique (and its obvious
analogs) to any initial ∆0 formula with n bounded quantifiers, Ax-3 can
transform an arbitrary ∆0 formula into a provably equivalent ∆R
0 formula. It
thus follows that although the Ax-3 system contains technically only instances
of Equation (2)’s axiom schema for ∆R
0 formulae, it nevertheless has an ability
to formally prove as theorems all the remaining instances of Ax-2’s axiom
schema for ∆0 formulae as well. (In particular if φ(x, y) is a ∆0 formula which
∗
R
is not ∆R
0 and if φ (x, y) is a ∆0 formula equivalent to φ(x, y), then Ax-3
can prove a theorem verifying the validity of Equation (2)’s axiom scheme for
φ(x, y) by first observing that this axiom scheme is valid for φ∗ (x, y) and then
observing the latter is equivalent to φ(x, y)’s axiom scheme.)
Hence although Ax-3 contains technically only a proper superset of Ax-2’s
induction axioms as formal axioms within its own induction schema, it has
the ability to formally prove the validity of all of Ax-2’s axioms. The proof
in the reverse direction (establishing that Ax-2 can prove all Ax-3’s axioms)
is straightforward because Ax-2 can easily prove all Ax-3’s Trivial-R axioms.
Hence, Ax-2 and Ax-3 will prove identical sets of theorems. 2
7

Remark 1. Our proof that Ax-3 is an anti-threshold for the Herbrandized
version of the Incompleteness Theorem will appear in Section 4. This result
is quite surprising because there are of course many more generalizations of
Gödel’s Second Incompleteness Theorem available in the mathematical literature [1–4,6–9,15,19,23,24,28,30–36,38,41,40,43,44,46,48,50,52,54] than there
are published examples of boundary-case style exceptions to its formalism.
In order to explain intuitively the core idea about why our paper is able
to achieve this surprising evasion of the Second Incompleteness Theorem, it
is helpful to let Υn denote Equation (23)’s ∆0 sentence. Note that this
sentence is comprised of O( n ) logic symbols. It asserts that the variables
i
v0 , v1 , v2 , . . . , vn , satisfy vi = 22 .
∃ v0 ≤ 2 ∃ v1 ≤ v0 ∗ v0 ∃ v2 ≤ v1 ∗ v1 ... ∃ vn ≤ vn−1 ∗ vn−1
v0 = 2 ∧ v1 = v0 ∗ v0 ∧ v2 = v1 ∗ v1 ∧ ... ∧ vn = vn−1 ∗ vn−1

(23)

It is easy to see there exists some ∆R
ΥR
that
0 sentence, called say
n ,
is the counterpart of Equation (23) written in a notation using split integers. This sentence will indicate the existence of a sequence of split integers
i
S0 , S1 , S2 , . . . , Sn , where Si represents the quantity 22 .
However although they in some sense represent equivalent concepts, there is
a fundamental difference between the ∆0 sentence Υn and its ∆R
0 counterpart
ΥR
.
This
difference
is
easiest
to
explain
if
one
uses
a
logical
language
that
n
has only 3 named constants, 0, 1 and 2, and if split integers are encoded
will be encoded as a sequence of at least
as base 2 numbers. Then ΥR
n
n
2 characters, but Υn ’s length has a sharply smaller O(n) magnitude. As
a consequence of this distinction (and its generalizations), we realized that
one could formulate an axiom system that was logically equivalent to the
more conventional encodings for IΣ0 , but which was an anti-threshold to the
Herbrandized version of the Second Incompleteness Theorem (using Definition
1’s terminology).
In particular, it turns out that the exponential difference between the lengths
R
of the ∆0 sentence Υn and its ∆R
0 counterpart Υn plays a major role in
understanding the central concept that motivated much of the research that
stimulated the current article. Thus, this paradigm (and its formal generalization for arbitrarily more complicated sequences of sentences) are used by
Section 4’s machinery in a much more sophisticated context to prove that it is
feasible to construct awkward encodings for IΣ0 , similar to Ax-3, that are actual anti-thresholds to the Herbrandized version of the Second Incompleteness
Theorem. (A reader should not worry if he does not follow fully the intuitive
idea, sketched in this paragraph, about the significance of logically equivalent
statements that have exponentially different sizes in length. This is because
8

a fully formalized proof of our main theorem, that uses this effect, will be
explored in great detail in the next section.)

4

Main Analysis

A sentence ψ in the propositional calculus will be called an Anti-Tautology
iff ψ is unsatisfiable (i.e. ¬ ψ is a tautology). Our definition of Herbrand deduction will be identical to the definitions used by Adamowicz, Hájek-Pudlák
and Kolodziejczyk [1,13,19], except that we will use a dual version of this definition that follows from De Morgan’s Rule, where disjunctions are replaced
with conjunctions and where tautologies are replaced with anti-tautologies. In
other words, our definition will use the well-known identity that
n
_
i=1

¬ φi

=

¬

n
^

φi

(24)

i=1

Our definition of Herbrand deduction will differ from its more conventional
definitions by using the right (instead of left) side of (24)’s identity. This
change in notation is unnecessary, but it does help to considerably simplify
our proofs.
Let Ψ denote an arbitrary prenex normal sentence such as the prototype
below, whose open subcomponent is denoted as f
ψ .
∀ x1 ∃ y1 ∀ x2 ∃ y2 ....

∀ xn ∃ yn

f
ψ (x , y ...x , y )
1

1

n

n

(25)

In a context where f1ψ (x1 ), f2ψ (x1 , x2 ) ... fnψ (x1 , x2 , . . . , xn ) are new function
symbols, Equation (26) is called the Skolemization of Equation (25).
∀ x1 ∀ x2 .... ∀ xn f
ψ [ x1 , f1ψ (x1 ) , x2 , f2ψ (x1 , x2 ) ... xn , fnψ (x1 , x2 , . . . , xn ) ] (26)
In a context where L is a logical language and α is an axiom system, we
will let CL and FL denote the set of constant and function symbols associated with L . Similarly, Fα will denote the set of “Skolemized” function
symbols associated with α’s axioms. Thus using (25) and (26)’s notation, let
α denote a system of axioms Ψ1 , Ψ2 , Ψ3 ... , and for an arbitrary index i let
its Skolemized function symbols carry names such as fiψ1 , fiψ2 , fiψ3 , ... The
Herbrandized Terms for this ordered pair (α, L) will then be defined to
be the set of all terms generated by the constants from the set CL combined
with the functional operations from the set Fα ∪ FL .
9

A Herbrandized Instance of a Skolemized axiom is a sentence identical
to this axiom except that all its universally quantified variables are replaced
by Herbrandized terms. For instance in a context where T1 , T2 , T3 ... are
Herbrandized terms, Equation (27) is such an instance of (26)’s axiom:
f
ψ [ T1 , f1ψ (T1 ) , T2 , f2ψ (T1 , T2 ) . . . , Tn , fnψ (T1 , T2 , . . . , Tn ) ]

(27)

Let ⊥ denote the logical constant of FALSE. A Herbrandized Proof of
⊥ from the axiom system α is defined as a finite collection of Herbrandized
instances of α together with a proof, in the pure propositional calculus, that
the conjunction of these instances is an anti-tautology.
Definition 2 : Using our revised notation convention, the theorem Υ
will be said to have a Herbrandized Proof from the axiom system β if
and only if the union of the axiom system β with the added sentence ¬ Υ
produces a Herbrandized proof of ⊥ .
More Notation: Let us say that a function G( x1 , x2 , . . . , xn ) is a
Non-Growth Function iff G( x1 , x2 , . . . , xn ) ≤ Max( x1 , x2 , . . . , xn ).
Define a set S of functions to be an Arithmetic Controlled Set iff S
includes the arithmetic functions of addition, multiplication and successor and
all its other functions are non-growth functions. Also, define a term t to be
an Arithmetically Controlled Term iff t is a term that uses only the
symbols of 0, 1 and 2 as its inputted constants and all its function symbols
come from some Arithmetic Controlled Set S. Thus if G1 and G2 are nongrowth functions, Equation (28) represents an arithmetically controlled term.
G1 [ (2 + 1) ∗ (1 + 1) , 1 + 2 ] ∗ G2 ( 2 + 2 + 0 , 2 + 2 + 1 + 0 )

(28)

Also, in a context where Ct and Ft denote the number of constant and
function symbols in t, we will use the following notation:
(1) MinG(t) will denote the quantity 2Ct +Ft .
(2) Val(t) will denote the quantity represented by the term t.
For example if G1 (x, y) = |x − y| and G2 (x, y) = Min(x, y) then Equation
(28)’s term t will have V al(t) = 3 ∗ 4 = 12 and MinG(t) = 225 (because
t contains 12 function symbols and 13 constant symbols).
Lemma 1 Let t be an arithmetically controlled term which satisfies the
inequality Val(t) ≥ 4. Then Val(t) < MinG(t).
Proof Sketch: Suppose for some k ≥ 2, that Val(t) = 2k . Then it
easy to see that t ’s maximally compressed representation as an arithmetically
10

controlled term is “ 2 ∗ 2 ∗ .... 2 ”. Thus MinG(t) = 22k−1 > Val(t) = 2k is valid
in this case because the preceding product has k appearances of the constant
2 connected by k − 1 appearances of the multiplication symbol. Moreover, it
is easily proven that terms, which are not powers of 2, are never represented in
a more compressed form than the greatest power of 2 that they exceed. Thus
Lemma 1 is valid for all terms where Val(t) ≥ 4. 2
Definition 3. For a fixed constant B > 0, a set S of functions is
defined to be a B−Bounded Arithmetic Set iff S includes the arithmetic
functions of addition, multiplication and successor and all its other functions
G satisfy the constraint that
G(x1 , x2 , ... , xn ) ≤ Max(x1 , x2 , ... , xn ) when Max(x1 , x2 , ... , xn ) < B
Also, we will say a term t is a B-Bounded Arithmetic Term iff t is a
term that uses only the symbols of 0, 1 and 2 as its inputted constants and all
its function symbols come from some B-Bounded Arithmetic Set S . Lemma
2 provides the generalization of Lemma 1 for B-bounded arithmetic terms.
Its proof is omitted because it is an easy generalization (see footnote 2 ) of
Lemma 1’s proof.
Lemma 2 Suppose that t is a B−bounded arithmetic term with MinG(t) < B
and Val(t) ≥ 4. Then Val(t) < MinG(t).
R
Definition 4. Let Φ denote the ΠR
1 sentence below whose ∆0 subformula
is defined by f
φ ( a1 , a2 ... an ) :

∀a1 ∀a2 ...∀an f
φ (a1 , a2 ...an ).

(30)

For any B ≥ 1, Equation (30) is called a B−Bounded Valid ΠR
1 sentence
iff (31) is valid under the standard model of the natural numbers
∀ a1 < B ∀ a2 < B ... ∀ an < B

f
φ ( a1 , a2 , . . . , an ).

(31)

Definition 5. An axiom system α will be said to satisfy the Canonical Arithmetic Condition when all α’s axioms are ΠR
1 sentences and they
include Q0 ’s nine axioms (i.e. Equations (5)–(13) ).
2

The intuitive reason that Lemmas 1 and 2 have similar proofs is that arithmetically controlled terms and B−bounded arithmetic terms have precisely identical
growth rates until a construction process builds an intermediate object t with
MinG(t) ≥ B .

11

(29)

Definition 6. Let Θ denote a methodology for assigning Gödel numbers to Herbrand proofs (which are henceforth denoted as P ). Let us recall
that MinG(t) was defined by Item (1) in this section. Define Θ to be a
Conventional Encoding Method if Θ(P ) > MinG(t) whenever the
proof P contains the Herbrand term t . (Such encodings are called “conventional” because all usual methods for encoding Herbrand proofs satisfy
Θ(P ) > MinG(t) .)
Theorem 2 Suppose α is a canonical arithmetic axiom system consisting
of B−Bounded Valid ΠR
1 sentences and Θ again satisfies Definition 6’s Conventional Encoding property. Then any Herbrand proof P of ⊥ from the
axiom system α will satisfy the inequality that Θ(P ) > B .
General Comments about Theorem 2 and its Proof: At an intuitive
level, Theorem 2 can be viewed as a consequence of the machineries of Lemma
2 and Definitions 3-6. This is because the B-Bounded validity condition in
Theorem 2’s hypothesis can be used to show that a Herbrand proof P of ⊥
must contain some term t where Val(t) ≥ B . In this context, the combination
of Lemma 2 and Definition 6 will imply that such a term will force P ’s Gödel
number to exceed the lower bound of B.
A more detailed formal proof of Theorem 2 appears in Appendix A. It explains the precise role that Definition 3 and Lemma 2 play in establishing
this theorem. Our recommendation is that a reader postpone examining Appendix A until after he finishes the remainder of this section. It will explain
the significance of Theorem 2 by showing how it enables us to prove the surprising result that the Ax-3 axiomatization for IΣ0 is an anti-threshold for the
Herbrandized version of the Second Incompleteness Theorem.

Theorem 3 For any arbitrary axiom system α and deduction method D, let
Diagonal(α, D) and αD denote the following two constructs:
A. Diagonal(α, D) will denote a logical sentence that states: “There is
no proof (using deduction method D ) of the falsity sentence ⊥ from the
union of the axiom system α with this sentence Diagonal(α, D) (looking
at itself).”
B. αD will denote the formal union of the axiom system α with the
sentence Diagonal(α, D).
Let Diag(Ax-3) denote the special variant of Diagonal(α, D) where α = Ax-3
and D designates Herbrand deduction. Both these two constructs and also
αD are well defined. Also, Diag(Ax-3) has a ΠR
1 encoding.
12

Abbreviated Sketch of Theorem 3’s proof. As early as 1938, Kleene
observed [17] that the Fixed Point Theorem implied that a type of cousin of
the sentence Diagonal(α, D) was well defined. More recently, Willard [49,52]
showed how Diagonal(α, D) could be formally endowed with a Π1 encoding
under the conventional language of arithmetic. It is reasonably straightforward
to generalize [49,52]’s result to establish that Diag(Ax-3) also has a well defined
ΠR
1 encoding (thus completing Theorem 3’s proof.) The remainder of this proof
sketch will summarize the ideas from [49,52] for the benefit of those readers
who are unfamiliar with this topic. Our discussion will employ the following
notation:
i PrfD
α ( t , p ) will denote a formula designating that p is a proof of the
theorem t from the axiom system α using the deduction method D.
ii ExPrfD
α ( h , t , p ) will be a formula stating that p is a proof (using the
deduction method D ) of a theorem t from the union of the axiom system
α with the added axiom sentence whose Gödel number equals h .
iii Subst ( g , h ) will denote Gödel’s classic substitution formula — which
yields TRUE when g is an encoding of a formula and h is an encoding
of a sentence that replaces all occurrence of free variables in g with a
mathematical term formalizing the Gödel number for representing “g”.
iv SubstPrfD
α ( g , t , p ) will denote the natural hybridizations of the constructs from Items (ii) and (iii) which yields a Boolean value of TRUE
exactly when there exists some integer h simultaneously satisfying both
Subst ( g , h ) and ExPrfDα ( h , t , p ).
Each of (i)–(iv) can be encoded as ∆R
0 formulae when α is any recursively enumerable axiom system. In particular, Appendices C and D of [49] essentially
established (see footnote 3 ) that the first three of these predicates can receive
∆R
0 encodings when one applies the theory of LinH functions from [13,21,56]
in a reasonably routine manner. In such a context, Equation (32) illustrates
D
one possible ∆R
0 encoding for SubstPrfα (g, t, p)’s graph. (It is equivalent to
D
“ ∃ h [ Subst(g, h) ∧ ExPrfα (h, t, p) ] ”, but Equation (32) is a ∆R
0 formula
— unlike the quoted expression.)
PrfDα ( t , p )

∨

∃ h ≤ p [ Subst ( g , h ) ∧ ExPrfDα ( h , t , p ) ] (32)

3

The results of Wrathall [56] have been noted by Hájek–Pudlák [13] to imply
that every LinH function [13,21,56] has a ∆0 encoding. Using a slightly different
“ ∆−
0 ”notation, the results from Appendices C and D of [49] explained how this reD
D
sult would imply that the each of PrfD
α (t, p), ExPrfα (h, t, p) and SubstPrfα (g, t, p)
−
R
have “ ∆0 ”encodings. Since the ∆0 class of formalae is broader than ∆−
0 ,
R
these formulae must also have ∆0 encodings.

13

D
Utilizing (32)’s ∆R
0 encoding for SubstPrfα (g, t, p), it is easy to formulate a
ΠR
1 encoding for the axiom sentence Diagonal(α, D). Thus, let Γ(g) denote
Equation (33)’s formula, and let N denote Γ(g)’s Gödel number. Then
Γ( N ) is a ΠR
1 encoding for Diagonal(α, D).

∀ p ¬ SubstPrfD
α( g , ⊥ , p )

(33)

2
Clarifying Comment: One should be somewhat cautious in interpreting
the meaning of Theorem 3. It does not indicate that Diag(Ax-3) is a logically
valid statement under the standard model of the natural numbers. Rather, it
merely indicates Diag(Ax-3) is a well defined ΠR
1 sentence. In order to establish
prove that Diag(Ax-3) is also valid, we will need the added force of Theorem
4 below.
Theorem 4 Let Ax-3* denote the union of the axiom system Ax-3 with the
sentence Diag(Ax-3). Then Ax-3* is consistent. (Thus, Ax-3 is an “antithreshold” for the Herbrandized version of the Second Incompleteness Theorem
under Definition 1’s notation convention.)
Proof of the Consistency Property of Ax-3* : Suppose for the sake
of establishing a proof-by-contradiction that Ax-3* was inconsistent. Then one
could identify a proof P of ⊥ whose Gödel number Θ(P ) is the smallest
Gödel number of a Herbrand proof of ⊥ from Ax-3*. We will now construct
from P an alternate Herbrand proof R of ⊥ where Θ(R) < Θ(P ). The
formal construction of such a R will suffice for our proof by contradiction to
reach its desired end because such a R cannot possibly exist (on account of
P ’s minimality property).
Our strategy is to use Theorem 2 to construct R from P . Theorem 2 is
relevant to Ax-3* because all the formal axiom sentences of Ax-3* are assuredly
4
ΠR
for the justification of this claim). In such a
1 sentences (see footnote
context, we may apply Theorem 2 to conclude that for some B < Θ(P ), at
least one of the axiom sentences of Ax-3* must fail to be a B-Bounded valid
ΠR
1 sentence. Moreover, it is obvious that all the axioms of Ax-3 possess an
unbounded level of validity (i.e they are B−Bounded valid for all possible B).
Hence, these two observations imply Diag(Ax-3) fails to be B−bounded valid
(simply because some axiom from Ax-3* must fail to be B−bounded valid,
and Diag(Ax-3) is the only available axiom belonging to Ax-3* that is not also
a member of Ax-3.)
4

Theorem 3 implies that the Diag(Ax-3) axiom of Ax-3* has a ΠR
1 structure, and
Section 2’s definition of Ax-3 implies that all the other axiom-sentences belonging
to Ax-3 are certainly also ΠR
1.

14

The latter observation, combined with Diag(Ax-3)’s definition implies (see
footnote 5 ) that some R with Θ(R) < B must be another proof of ⊥.
Hence our last two inequalities certainly imply that Θ(R) < B < Θ(P ) .
This finishes our proof-by-contradiction because P ’s previously presumed
minimality has been contradicted by R. 2
Remark 2. Our discussion in this section had assumed that the terms T
in a ∆R
0 ’s formula’s bounded quantifiers included only the Maximum function
symbol. The results of Theorem 4 would actually also hold if these quantifiers were also permitted to include the Addition function symbol. (The only
reason our discussion had omitted the possibility that both the addition and
maximum function symbols appear in the ∆R
0 formula φ’s bounded quantifiers
in Equation (2) was for the sake of simplifying the presentation.)

Remark 3. The attached Appendix B discusses a yet further reason why
Theorem 4 is of interest. The anonymous referee had suggested we add this appendix to the current paper. Its methodologies are related to Kolodziejczyk’s
observation [18,19] that semantic tableaux and Herbrand deduction can sometimes have an exponential difference in their proof lengths. The purpose of
Appendix B is to sketch how one can generalize [55]’s results for Ax-1 and
Ax-2 to establish that Ax-3 is also a threshold for the semantic tableaux version of the Second Incompleteness Theorem. In a context where Theorem 4
had established the polar opposite result for Ax-3 under Herbrand deduction,
this contrast is, of course, quite interesting.

5

Discussion of Significance of Results

A comparison between our research and the prior research of Kreisel-Takeuti
and Pudlák [22,31,39] was postponed until the closing part of this current
article because the results from Sections 3 and 4 were needed to precede this
discussion.
In this section, S(x) will denote the “successor” operation that maps the
integer x onto x + 1. A formula ϕ(x) is called [13] a Definable Cut for an
axiom system α iff α can prove:
ϕ(0) AND ∀ x { ϕ(x) ⇒ ϕ[S(x)] } AND ∀ x ∀ y < x { ϕ(x) ⇒ ϕ(y) } (34)
5

The strictly formalistic definition of Diag(Ax-3) as the entity “ Γ(N ) ” (using a
self-reference principle) can be found in the last sentence of Theorem 3’s proof. The
syntax of its Equation (33) implies that if Diag(Ax-3) fails to be B−Bounded valid
then another proof R must assuredly exist for the sentence ⊥ with Θ(R) < B .

15

A very extensive literature [1,3,6,10,12,13,16,20,21,25,27–33,35,37,42–46,50,51]
has studied Definable cuts. We have published two 6-page summaries of this
literature in the review chapters of our articles [52,54]. (Also, Pudlak’s fulllength survey article [32] offers an excellent review of the work done in this
subject prior to approximately 1990.)
All axioms systems, strictly weaker than Peano Arithmetic, contain some
definable cut that is not provably equivalent to the full set of integers. In
the proof-theory literature, the definition of a “Definable Cut” (see [13]) is
formally unrelated to Gentzen’s notion of a sequent calculus deductive “cut
rule”, despite their very similar sounding names.
Let d Ψ e denote Ψ ’s Gödel number, and PrfD
α (t, p) denote that p is
a proof of the theorem t from the axiom system α using the deduction
method D. Also, let ϕ(x) denote a definable cut. Let us say that an axiom
system α can recognize its Cut-Localized D-consistency under ϕ(x) iff
α can formally prove:
∀p

{ ϕ(p) ⇒ ¬ PrfD
α ( d0 = 1e , p ) }

(35)

Pudlák [31] proved that no consistent extension of the Tarski-MostowskiRobinson [41] system Q can prove the validity of Equation (35) for any
definable cut when D denotes either Hilbert deduction or a Gentzen sequent
calculus system with a deductive cut rule.
At the same time, the literature about Definable Cuts has also defined
some circumstances where (35) is provable from α when for example D
denotes either semantic tableaux or Herbrand deduction. The strongest result
of this type was discovered by Pudlák [31]. For both Herbrand and semantic
tableaux deduction, [31] showed that it is possible to construct a definable
cut ϕ(p) where α can prove the validity of Equation (35)’s Cut-Localized
D-consistency property when α is an axiom system with finite cardinality
that satisfies a relatively minor additional constraint called “sequentiality”.
A second class of boundary-like exceptions to the Second Incompleteness
can be constructed via the “Cut Free Analysis” (CFA) systems of Kreisel and
Takeuti [22,39]. It has consisted of a Second Order Logic generalization of the
cut-free version of Gentzen’s Sequent Calculus that is able to prove some types
of versions of statements about its own consistency
The work of Kreisel and Takeuti [22,39] had chronologically preceded most
of the literature about Definable Cuts. There is a fascinating partial analogy
between the perspectives of these two approaches. This is because the KreiselTakeuti papers [22,39] can be viewed as using an analog of Equation (35) in
an implicit manner. Thus [22] employs a set of objects, which we shall call I,
16

that includes all the standard integers plus plausibly non-standard integers
that can represent a proof of a contradiction. It then uses I to construct
a subset of it, called “ N ”, which can be viewed as a representation of the
natural numbers. (More precisely, the pages 16-17 of [22] construct N from
I in this manner by employing Dedekind’s and Zermelo’s inductive secondorder logic definitions of the natural numbers. They thus formally treat the
Dedekind and Zermelo inductive definitions of N as an analog of ϕ(p) in
Equation (35)’s Cut-Localized D-Consistency statement.)
A question which then naturally arises is whether or not one can also develop
some types of axiom systems which can prove their own consistency without
relying upon Equation (35)’s “Cut-Localized D-consistency” machinery (or
[22]’s analog of it for a second-order generalization of a Gentzen Cut-Free
logic.) Such an approach is desirable because one would ideally like to characterize the properties of the natural numbers directly — instead of being
required to view them as a subset of a potentially larger set of objects, called
I .
It is indeed possible to make some progress in this area by using a third approach, relying upon the Diagonal(α, D) sentence, which was formally defined
by the Theorem 3. (Analogs of this Diagonal(α, D) sentence have also been
used in several of our previous papers [47,49,52,54] in some contexts quite
different from the paradigm outlined by Theorem 4.)
It is difficult to make more detailed comparisons between the partial exceptions to Gödel’s Second Theorem that use our Diagonal(α, D) sentence with
the methods of Kreisel-Takeuti and Pudlák [22,31,39]. Each technique has its
own distinct separate advantage. There also appears to be no natural way to
hybridize these techniques. (The point is that each of these different methodologies is looking at a different type of problem setting, where a different form
of solution method is available.)
In particular, our research has treated the sentence Diagonal(α, D) as an
axiom of α while the Kreisel-Takeuti and Pudlák papers [22,31,39] treat
their analogs of Equation (35) as derived theorems. In this context, it is very
natural for a reader to inquire whether is is preferable to treat an “I am
consistent” statement as a theorem rather than as an axiom of the system α
that generates it?
There is surprisingly no easy answer to this question. For instance, if one’s
goal is to attempt to return to the original objectives of Hilbert’s consistency
program, then the Kreisel-Takeuti and Pudlák approaches are quite significant
because they indicate some respects in which an axiom system can indeed formally prove at least a reduced versions of its consistency statement. However
from an alternate perspective, there is a substantial difficulty with approaches
17

that treat the statement “I am consistent” and its analogs as a theorem rather
than as an axiom. The difficulty arises when the relevant systems do not have
an operating modus ponens or Gentzen-like cut rule (as is the case with the
axiom systems of [22,31]). Such systems cannot draw inferences when they
prove a theorem essentially declaring that “I am consistent”. However, a similar such difficulty does not affect the self-justifying axiom systems in our
earlier papers [47,49,52–54] or in Theorem 4 because they treat the statement
Diagonal(α, D) as a formal axiom rather than as a theorem. (The point here is
that axiom sentences, quite unlike theorem sentences, can be permissibly used
as intermediate steps to generate other deductions under the inference rules of
semantic tableaux, the cut-free sequent calculus and/or Herbrand deduction
— thus causing their presence to have stronger implications.)
Thus, there are quite different insights that arise from systems that treat
variants of the “I am consistent” statement as an axiom instead of as a theorem
(because of the different connotations these two approaches carry). Neither
approach is uniformly preferable over the other. Another difference between
our research and the investigations of Kreisel-Takeuti and Pudlák [22,31,39]
is that the sentence Diagonal(α, D) declares the consistency of α in a global
sense whereas Equation (35) refers only to the localized subset of integers that
lie within the domain of ϕ. (In the case of Kreisel-Takeuti second-order logic
system, Equation (35) is used implicitly on the pages 16 and 17 of [22] to draw
the distinction between what we have called I and N earlier in this section.)
When one compares our results in Theorem 4 or in our earlier papers
[47,49,52–54] with the research of Kreisel-Takeuti and Pudlák [22,31,39], it is
best to remember that Gödel’s Second Incompleteness Theorem precludes an
exception to it from becoming too powerful. Thus, it is possible to develop different types of partial evasions to the Second Incompleteness Theorem around
its periphery that shed different types of useful new perspectives. However, it
is awkward to attempt to hybridize these different types of partial evasions
into a stronger uniform evasion. This is because if such a hybrid combined the
strengths of the different approaches X, Y and Z, then it would become so
strong that its properties could potentially violate the statement of Gödel’s
historic result. Thus, there are trade-offs where different types of useful insights, stemming from different approaches (that are difficult to hybridize into
one unified methodology), examine somewhat different problems and produce
different new perspectives.
Part of the reason that Ax-3’s evasion of the Herbrandized version of the
Second Incompleteness Theorem is interesting is that it is known that further
improvements upon this result are very difficult to obtain. Thus, AdamowiczZbierski [1,3] showed that IΣ0 +Ω1 was unable to verify its Herbrand consistency, Willard [48,50,55] modified this result to show the Second Incompleteness Theorem applied also to Ax-1 and Ax-2’s versions of IΣ0 ’s axiomatization
18

under semantic tableaux deduction, and Salehi [33] extended some of the earlier results from [1,3,48,50] to develop some further incompleteness results for
IΣ0 under Herbrand deduction. Thus in a context where several earlier papers
have explored types of results where the Second Incompleteness Theorem holds
for encodings for IΣ0 and its cousins , it is surprising that the current article
has documented a paradigm where at least the Ax-3 encoding for IΣ0 evades
the Herbrandized version of the Second Incompleteness Theorem.

6

Broader Perspectives

Some added notation is useful so that we can examine Theorem 4’s results
from a broader perspective. Let us say a formula Φ is ΣR
1 when it can be
written in the form ¬ Ψ where Ψ is ΠR
.
Some
other
fairly
conventional
1
R
notation is that a sentence will be called Πk+1 when it can be written in
the form ∀ v1 ∀ v2 ... ∀ vn φ(v1 , v2 , . . . , vn ) where φ(v1 , v2 , . . . , vn ) is a ΣR
k
formula. Likewise, a sentence will be called ΣR
when
it
can
be
written
as
k+1
∃ v1 ∃ v2 ... ∃ vn φ(v1 , v2 , . . . , vn ) where φ(v1 , v2 , . . . , vn ) is a ΠR
k formula.
R
Also, a sentence will be said to be Level−k if it is either ΠR
or
Σ
k
k.

Definition 7. Let H denote a sequence of ordered pairs (t1 , p1 ), (t2 , p2 ), ... (tn , pn ),
where pi is a Herbrand proof of the theorem ti . For an arbitrary integer
k ≥ 1 , this list H will be defined to be a Herb−k proof of a theorem T
from the axiom system α iff T = tn and also:
(1) Each axiom in pi ’s proof is either one of t1 , t2 , ... , ti−1 or comes from α.
(2) Each of the “intermediately derived theorems” t1 , t2 , ... , tn−1 must lie
within the Level-k class of sentences.
Intuitively, Herb−k deduction can be viewed as an extension of Herbrand
deduction that contains a type of Gentzen-like deductive cut rule for Level-k
sentences.

The Definition 7’s machinery is useful for helping to describe both the maximal generalizations as well as inherent limitations of Section 4’s formalism.
Thus using Definition 7’s notation, one can establish the following two tightly
complementary negative and positive results:
I. There exists a logically valid ΠR
1 sentence denoted as Ψ such that no
consistent axiom system can contain Ψ as an axiom and prove a theorem
affirming its own consistency under Herb−2 deduction.
19

II. In contrast for each consistent axiom system A , there exists a consistent
axiom system I(A) that can prove all A ’s ΠR
1 theorems and recognize its
own consistency under Herb−1 deduction.
In other words, Items I and II indicate that there is a fundamental difference
between Herb−1 and Herb−2 deduction. Thus, Herb−1 deduction allows for a
type of robust evasion of the Second Incompleteness Theorem under a formalism that contains a type of limited Gentzen-style cut rule. However, Result-II
precludes this evasion from becoming too strong.
We will not prove results I and II here because each has a rather long proof.
Also, partial analogs of these two prior results have appeared in our prior
work. Thus, [51] and [52] have used the term Tab−k deduction to refer to a
construct similar to Herb−k deduction except for the following two changes:
(1) Under Tab−k deduction, the proofs p1 , p2 , . . . , pn associated with
the sequence (t1 , p1 ), (t2 , p2 ), . . . , (tn , pn ), are semantic tableaux
proofs instead of Herbrand proofs.
(2) Also under Tab−k deduction, the intermediate results t1 , t2 , . . . , tn−1
will technically represent what [51,52] had called Π∗k and Σ∗k sentences
∗
∗
R
(instead of being ΠR
k and Σk sentences). These Πk and Σk sentences can
R
be intuitively viewed as being roughly analogous to ΠR
k and Σk sentences
— except that they contain no multiplication function symbol. (They
instead use a relation primitive M (x, y, z) to treat multiplication as a
3-way relation.)
In essence Item-I’s result can be viewed as being analogous to [51]’s main
theorem. Similarly, Item-II’s result can be viewed as following from a rather
natural hybridization of [52]’s main result with the machinery that we had
developed in Section 4.
For further details about this material, the reader should examine [51,52]’s
generic formalisms. The reason we had slightly changed the topic from semantic tableaux to Herbrand deduction in the current paper is because Herbrand
deduction and its Herb−1 generalization possess one interesting quality that
semantic tableaux and Tab−1 deduction simply do not possess. This is that
the Ax-3 encoding of the axiom system IΣ0 is an anti-threshold to the Herbrandized (and also Herb−1 ) versions of the Second Incompleteness Theorem. However, the similar anti-threshold effect does not apply also to semantic tableaux deduction (as is explained in Appendix B). Thus, the Herb−1
deduction method will support certain types of evasions of the Second Incompleteness Theorem that have no analogs under Tab−1 deduction. (The
interested reader should also examine Kolodziejczyk work [18,19], which observed how semantic tableaux and Herbrand-styled proofs can sometimes have
an exponential difference in their lengths.)
20

In essence the over-all goal of our research, in the current paper and in
the previous papers [47] – [55], has been to attempt to sharpen the academic
community’s understanding of the meaning of the Second Incompleteness Theorem, by exploring both its maximal generalizations and permitted allowed
boundary-case exceptions. We plan to prepare a new article about this subject in the near future, describing the underlying philosophical motivation for
much of this research. One must clearly approach this subject matter carefully because the many generalizations of the Second Incompleteness Theorem
are seemingly more significant than its occasional boundary-case exceptions.
The reason that the partial exceptions to the Second Incompleteness Theorem should not be ignored is because Gödel’s Incompleteness Theorem is
often regarded as the paramount discovery of 20th century mathematics. It
thus beckons the academic community to explore both its maximum generalizations and possible boundary case exceptions, so that an understanding of
the full meaning of its historic result can be sharpened and made more precise. Within such a limited-but-precise framework, the anomalous behavior of
Ax-3, documented in this article, should be of scholarly interest.

Acknowledgments: I warmly thank Leszek Kolodziejczyk for the interesting questions that he had emailed me on November 16, 2005. Those questions
played a major role in encouraging me to re-examine my earlier work in [50]
for one more time. I also thank Zofia Adamowicz and Konrad Zdanowksi, who
helped at least partially stimulate the emailed questions from L. Kolodziejczyk
through their conversations with him in Warsaw. Those questions from Leszek
Kolodziejczyk had greatly stimulated my research in this article. I also thank
the anonymous referee for his many useful comments, including the suggestion
that I add the Appendix B to this article.

Appendix A: The Proof For Theorem 2

This appendix will explain in further detail how Definitions 3-6 and Lemma
2 may be used to prove Theorem 2. Our discussion will begin with one further
definition and two further lemmas.

Definition 8. Consider the possibility that Ψ is the prenex normal sentence, whose open part is formalized by f
ψ (x1 , y1 ...xn , yn ), shown in Equation
(36) and whose Skolemized normalized form is illustrated by Equation (37).
∀ x1 ∃ y1 ∀ x2 ∃ y2 ....

∀ xn ∃ yn

f
ψ (x , y ...x , y )
1

1

n

n

(36)

∀x1 ∀x2 .... ∀xn f
ψ [ x1 , f1ψ (x1 ) , x2 , f2ψ (x1 , x2 ), ... xn , fnψ (x1 , x2 ... xn ) ] (37)
21

For any B ≥ 1, Equations (36) and (37) will be called a B−Bounded Good
Skolemization iff one can define (37)’s Skolem functions f1Ψ , f2Ψ , ... fnΨ so
they satisfy both Definition 3’s B−Bounded requirement (see footnote 6 )
and Equation (38) under the standard model of the natural numbers.
∀ x1 < B ∀ x2 < B ....

∀ xn < B

f
ψ [ x1 , f1ψ (x1 ) , x2 , f2ψ (x1 , x2 ) . . . , xn , fnψ (x1 , x2 . . . , xn ) ]

(38)

Likewise, we will say an axiom system α has a B−Bounded Good Skolemization iff all its axioms are so Skolemized.

Lemma 3 Using the notation conventions from Definitions 4 and 8, every
B−Bounded Valid ΠR
1 sentence can be rewritten into a logically equivalent
form that has a B−Bounded Good Skolemization.
Proof. Follows immediately from the definitions of Bounded Validity and
Bounded Good Skolemizations (i.e. see Definitions 4 and 8).

Remark 4: From Lemma 3, one can gain a further intuitive appreciation
of the role that Definition 3 will play in our proof of Theorem 2. This lemma
indicated that every B−Bounded Valid ΠR
1 sentence had a B−Bounded Good
Skolemization, and Definition 8 indicated that such skolemizations satisfied
Definition 3’s requirement that no such invoked Skolem function would grow
faster than the multiplication primitive. Such slow-growth Skolem functions
characterize Ax-3 (but not also the Ax-1 and Ax-2 systems). The intuitive
reason for this distinction is that the paradigm in the footnote 6 of Definition
8 applies only to Ax-3.
Lemma 4 Using the notation conventions from Definitions 5, 6 and 8, suppose that α is a canonical arithmetic system consisting of prenex sentences
with B−Bounded Good Skolemizations and that Θ satisfies the Conventional
Encoding property. Then any Herbrand proof P of ⊥ from the axiom system
α will satisfy Θ(P ) > B .

Proof-by-contradiction: Consider the contrary possibility that the inequality Θ(P ) > B failed and that P is a Herbrand-proof of ⊥ from the
system α where Θ(P ) ≤ B. We shall denote this inequality as ∗ ∗ ∗ .
6

The function of Definition 3’s B−Bounded requirement is that it assures that
each of Equation (37)’s Skolem functions of f1Ψ , f2Ψ , ... satisfy the constraint that
fiΨ (x1 , x2 , ... , xi ) ≤ Max(x1 , x2 , ... , xi ) whenever Max(x1 , x2 , ... , xn ) < B .

22

Definition 6 had indicated every term T in the proof P satisfies the
inequality of Θ(P ) > MinG(T.) Also, Lemma 2 implied Val(T ) <MinG(T ).
These inequalities and *** imply that every term T in the proof P satisfies
Val(T ) < B

(39)

Equation (39) implies all the terms T1 , T2 , T3 ... in the Herbrandized instances
in the proof P satisfy Val(Ti ) < B. The normalized form of an instance of
a Skolemized axiom is illustrated by Equation (40). The combination of our
Val(Ti ) < B inequalities together with (38)’s B−Bounded constraint on α’s
axioms implies that each such instance of (40) appearing in the proof P must
be automatically valid under the standard model of the natural numbers.
f
ψ [ T1 , f1ψ (T1 ) , T2 , f2ψ (T1 , T2 ) , . . . , Tn , fnψ (T1 , T2 . . . , Tn ) ]

(40)

The latter observation completes our proof-by-contradiction because it contradicts the statement ∗ ∗ ∗ that had started our proof. More precisely ∗ ∗ ∗
had asserted that P was a Herbrand-proof of ⊥ from the axiom system α.
However, the Footnote 7 shows that such is impossible when the last sentence
of the preceding paragraph indicated that each instance of (40)’s Skolemized
axiom is valid under the standard model of the natural numbers. 2
Finishing the Proof for Theorem 2.
It is easy to combine the machineries of Lemmas 3 and 4 to complete the proof of Theorem 2. This is
because Lemma 3 had indicated that every B−Bounded Valid ΠR
1 sentence
can be rewritten into a logically equivalent form that has a B−Bounded Good
Skolemization. Thus, Theorem 2 follows by simply taking such rewritten forms
of α’s axioms and then applying Lemma 4’s machinery. 2

Appendix B: An Analysis of Ax-3’s Semantic Tableaux Properties

This appendix will illustrate how the methods of [55] may be extended to
prove that Ax-3 satisfies the semantic tableaux version of the Second Incompleteness Theorem. Our discussion will be closely related to Kolodziejczyk’s
observations [18,19] that (in the context of Buss’s Bounded Arithmetic [5])
7

The point here is simply that a conjunction of Skolemized instances can produce
a proof of ⊥ only when there exists no model M where all these instances
are simultaneously valid. Hence when the preceding paragraph shows that all these
Skolemized instances are simultaneously valid under the Standard Model of the
Natural Numbers, it implies that certainly no such proof of ⊥ can feasibly exist.

23

semantic tableaux and Herbrand deduction can sometimes have an exponential or greater difference in their proof lengths. In a context where Theorem 4
had showed that Ax-3 was an anti-threshold under Herbrand deduction, the
results in this appendix are noteworthy because they imply Ax-3 has polar
opposite qualities under semantic tableaux and Herbrand deduction.
The discussion in this abbreviated appendix will assume that the reader is
familiar with [55]’s proof that Ax-1 and Ax-2 satisfy the semantic tableaux
version of the Second Incompleteness Theorem. We will also often rely upon
the notation convention from the second paragraph of Section 2 of [55] (which
defined semantic tableaux deduction’s eight elimination rules).
It is desirable to examine a fourth axiomization for IΣ0 , called Ax-4, before
considering Ax-3 because such an approach will help make the underlying
intuitions behind our methodologies easier to appreciate. In our discussion,
the symbol Ψ will denote the ΠR
1 sentence defined by Equation (41). Ax-4
will be defined to be an encoding of IΣ0 that is identical to Ax-3 except that
it includes Equation (41)’s added sentence. (Since Ax-3 can trivially prove the
validity of Equation (41), the Ax-4 system is clearly logically equivalent to
Ax-3. Thus while proof lengths may differ in these two axiom systems, the
final theorems that they derive are the same.)
∀z

∀q ≤ z

[ q∗q ≤ z ⇒ ∃ r ≤ z ( r = q∗q ) ]

(41)

Lemma 5 The axiom system Ax-4 satisfies the semantic tableaux version of
the Second Incompleteness Theorem. (In other words using Definition 1’s notation, Ax-4 is a “threshold for the Second Incompleteness Effect” under semantic tableaux deduction).
Proof Sketch: Our justification of Lemma 5 will employ the definition of
semantic tableaux deduction that had appeared in Section 2 of [55]. Its second
paragraph listed eight elimination rules for semantic tableaux deduction. For
any term s, its sixth rule applies to bounded existential quantifiers appearing
in expressions similar to:
∃ v ≤ s Θ(v)

(42)

For an arbitrary new constant symbol U that does not appear in the base
axiom system α or in any higher node in the semantic tableaux proof tree,
this rule 6 allows Equation (43) to be a descendant of Equation (42)’s node.
U ≤ s ∧ Θ(U )

(43)

Also consider Equation (44)’s universally quantified sentence.
∀v

Φ(v)

(44)
24

In this context for any term t which is free in Φ, the seventh elimination rule
in Section 2 of [55] indicated that a descendant of Equation (44)’s sentence
in a semantic tableaux proof tree is allowed to be any sentence of the form
Φ(t) . In particular if we take t to be a term of the form “ U ∗ U ” (where
U was defined in Equation (43) ) then this universal quantifier elimination
rule may produce the following reduction from Equation (44).
Φ( U ∗ U )

(45)

Lastly for any term ŝ, consider Equation (46)’s sentence.
∀ v ≤ ŝ Φ(v)

(46)

In this context for any term t (again required to be free in Φ), the eighth
elimination rule from Section 2 of [55] indicated that Equation (47) is allowed
to be descendant of Equation (46)’s sentence in a semantic tableaux proof.
t ≤ ŝ

⇒

Φ(t)

(47)

Since Equation (47)’s rule for eliminating universal quantifiers can apply to
any term t (free in Φ), it is applicable to the case where t is a term of the
form “ U ” where U is a new constant created by Equation (43)’s elimination
rule. In this special case, Equation (47)’s elimination rule can be rewritten as:
U ≤ ŝ

⇒

Φ( U )

(48)

In essence, one may apply to Equation (41) n iterations of the elimination
rules from Equations (43), (45) and (48) to construct a sequence of constants
U0 , U1 , U2 , . . . Un such that U0 = 2 and Ui+1 = Ui ∗ Ui . (The footnote 8
summarizes the structure of the i−th round of these n iterations.) In a formal
sense, these n iterations may thus be simulated by a fragment of a semantic
tableaux proof tree, denoted as F , where all the branches of F are closed
except for one branch, called the pivotal branch, which contains the parameter
symbols of U0 , U1 , U2 , . . . Un together with a collection of sentences,
appearing in linear order, asserting that U0 = 2 and Ui+1 = Ui ∗ Ui .
n

Hence this “pivotal branch” of F will imply that Un = 22 . Moreover
since the fragment F will have only O( n ) nodes, it will establish the
8

The i−th iteration of this process will have z , q and r from Equation (41)
be replaced by respectively Ui ∗ Ui , Ui and Ui+1 via the elimination rules from
respectively Equations (45), (48) and (43) to produce an essentially thrice-revised
form of Equation (41) which implies that Ui+1 = Ui ∗ Ui .

25

n

existence of a number Un = 22 , whose binary encoding has a 2n length
that is much larger than F ’s length.
The above invariant is essentially all that we need to generalize [55]’s semantic tableaux version of the Second Incompleteness Theorem so that it also
applies to Ax-4. (We obviously have omitted many details here. However, they
are relatively straightforward extensions of [55]’s methodologies because the
super-exponential growth property, established by the prior paragraphs, opens
an avenue for introducing [55]’s proof techniques, whose formal details are too
lengthy to be fully duplicated during this abbreviated proof sketch.) 2
The remainder of this appendix will sketch how Lemma 5’s variant of the
semantic tableaux version of the Second Incompleteness Theorem can be extended from the axiom system Ax-4 to Ax-3 (itself). Before doing so, we wish
to introduce one further preliminary lemma.
Lemma 6 The axiom system Ax-4 satisfies the same anti-threshold property
for Herbrandized deduction as did Ax-3 (in Theorem 4 ).
Proof Sketch Every aspect of the proof of Theorem 4 (for Ax-3) does generalize also for Ax-4’s paradigm. This is because Theorem 4’s proof generalizes
for any extension of Ax-3 that consists of a finite number of additional logically
valid ΠR
1 sentences. Thus, if α denotes any such an extension of Ax-3 and if
∗
α denotes the extension of α which contains one additional ΠR
1 sentence,
asserting the consistency of α∗ (analogous to Theorem 3’s Diagonal(α, D)
sentence), then every aspect of our prior analysis of Ax-3∗ applies also to α∗ .
Thus using the same reasoning as before, it follows that α (and hence also
Ax-4) must be anti-thresholds relative to Herbrand deduction. 2
The combination of Lemmas 5 and 6 already shows that semantic tableaux
and Herbrand deduction have polar opposite threshold properties with respect
to Ax-4. (This is because the latter satisfies the semantic tableaux version
of the Second Incompleteness Theorem, but it does not also satisfy its Herbrandized variant.) The same pair of polar opposite qualities also applies to
IΣ0 ’s Ax-3 axiomization. However, the proof that Ax-3 satisfies the semantic
tableaux version of the Second Incompleteness Theorem is substantially more
complicated than Lemma 5’s analogous result for Ax-4.
The final goal in this appendix will thus be to explain how one may incrementally revise Lemma 5’s proof-analysis for Ax-4 so that a similar incompleteness property also applies to Ax-3. In our discussion, f
ψ (v) will denote
the following ∆R
formula,
which
is
free
only
in
v
:
0
∀q ≤ v

[ q∗q ≤ v ⇒ ∃ r ≤ v ( r = q∗q ) ]
26

(49)

In this notation, the sentence Ψ that constituted Ax-4’s one additional ΠR
1
axiom-sentence (defined in Equation (41) ) can be rewritten as:
∀v

f
ψ (v)

(50)

Note that Ax-3, unlike Ax-4, does not contain Equation (50)’s ΠR
1 sentence
as an axiom of its formalism. However using an analog of “passive induction”
from our paper [55], we will show Ax-3 contains a counterpart of Equation
(50) within its inductive schema that has comparable properties.
In particular, let

ψ (z) denote the following ∆R
0 formula:
|{z}

{ f
ψ (0) ∧ ∀y ≤ z [ f
ψ (y) =⇒ f
ψ (y 0 ) ] } =⇒ ∀y ≤ z f
ψ (y)

(51)

Then Equation (52) represents an encoding of one of Ax-3’s induction axioms.
∀z

ψ (z)

(52)

|{z}

In order to explain the significance of this added notation, let Ψ again denote
Equation (41)’s axiom sentence (which we saw was identical to Equation (50)’s
sentence except that the latter uses a slightly different notation). Also, let Ψ∗
denote Equation (52)’s sentence. In this notation, Ψ∗ can be viewed as a
cousin of Ψ which has the property that although Ψ is not an axiom of
Ax-3, its cousin Ψ∗ is a formal axiom of Ax-3.
The latter property is important because we need a vehicle for formally
translating proofs from the Ax-4 system to proofs in the Ax-3 system. Since
Ψ is the only axiom belonging to Ax-4 which is not also in Ax-3, Equation
(51)’s formal counterpart of it, called Ψ∗ , will provide a means for doing
this translation. The implications of this translation mechanism is described
by our next lemma.
Lemma 7 Let Ω denote an arbitrary theorem that is proven from the axiom
system Ax-4 under a semantic tableaux proof T that consists of n applications of the ∀ elimination to rule to Equation (50)’s axiom sentence of Ψ .
For some term ti , let us assume that the i−th such application of this rule
replaces Equation (50) with the reduced sentence of
f
ψ ( ti )

(53)

Then for a constant k whose value is entirely independent of n , one can
construct a proof T ∗ of the same theorem Ω from the axiom system Ax-3
27

where the difference between the number of node-sentences appearing in the
proofs of T and of T ∗ is bounded by the quantity of kn .
Proof: The justification of Lemma 7 is fairly straightforward. On each occasion where T ’s proof contains a node similar to Equation (53), the comparable
structure in T ∗ will replace this sentence with a tree-fragment that consists
of the following four components:
(1) An initial node-sentence of the form (54) (which is justified because it is
an instance of Equation (52)’s axiom sentence of Ψ∗ ).
ψ ( ti )

(54)

|{z}

(2) A branch separation will appear directly below Equation (54)’s node that
consists of the two sibling sentences of (55) and (56). In light of Equation
(51)’s definition of
ψ , this binary separation is justified by the
|{z}

semantic tableaux rule for eliminating the ⇒ symbol (which was
formalized by Item 4 from the second paragraph of [55]’s Section 2).
¬ { f
ψ (0) ∧ ∀y ≤ ti [ f
ψ (y) =⇒ f
ψ (y 0 ) ] }

(55)

∀y ≤ ti f
ψ (y)

(56)

(3) Since Ax-3 can prove Equation (41)’s sentence of Ψ as a theorem, it
is trivial to establish that for some fixed constant k1 which does not
depend on i , one may insert a closed semantic tableaux proof of length
k1 under Equation (55)’s sentence, which accomplishes the desired effect
of showing that Equation (55) is inherently contradictory.
(4) Using one more time [55]’s semantic tableaux rules for eliminating the
bounded universal quantifiers and the ⇒ symbol, one may easily
insert a branch below Equation (56) that ends with the pair of sibling
sentences given in equations (57) and (58) below. Moreover, it is evident
that Equation (57) is inherently contradictory. Thus for some fixed constant k2 (which again does not depend on i ) , the net consequence
of this step will be to consist of a sequence of k2 node sentences that
includes the sentences given in (57) and (58) and closes the proof-tree
that descends from Equation (57) with the desired forced contradiction.
¬ ( ti ≤ ti )

(57)

f
ψ ( ti )

(58)

Let k denote a constant that equals the quantity of k1 + k2 + 3 .
Then each iteration of the above 4-step procedure will replace Equation (53)’s
sentence with a subtree fragment consisting of k new sentences. Note that
the final sentence at the end of each such iteration (given in Equation (58) )
28

contains the identical logical statement as was given in Equation (53)’s initial
sentence. Since all the other branches of our new sub-structure are closed and
since Equations (53) and Equation (58) are identical to each other, it follows
that after we finish performing n iterations of the above process, introducing
kn new sentences, our new revised semantic tableaux tree will prove the
theorem Ω from Ax-3 instead of Ax-4. 2
Theorem 5 The axiom system Ax-3 (similar to Ax-4) satisfies the semantic
tableaux version of the Second Incompleteness Theorem. (Thus using Definition 1’s notation, Ax-3 is also a “threshold for the Second Incompleteness
Effect” under semantic tableaux deduction).
Proof Sketch: For the sake of brevity, we will only outline the intuition behind Theorem 5’s proof. It will be essentially a consequence of the combination
of Lemmas 5 and 7.
In particular, the core idea behind Lemma 5’s analysis of Ax-4 was to employ
a sequence of n iterated applications of Equation (41)’s axiom of Ψ so as
to construct a formal sequence of constants U0 , U1 , U2 , . . . Un such that
U0 = 2 and Ui+1 = Ui ∗ Ui . By Lemma 7, the precisely identical sequence of
U0 , U1 , U2 , . . . Un can be constructed from Ax-3 using only kn additional
sentences, for some fixed constant k whose value is independent of n .
n

Since Un represents the quantity of 22 whose binary encoding has a
length of 2n , this binary length is clearly much larger than kn as n
approaches of infinity. As a result of this exponential difference in lengths, it
is relatively routine to revise Lemma 5’s proof of the semantic tableaux version
of the Second Incompleteness Theorem for Ax-4 so that it may also apply to
Ax-3. (The remaining details are analogous to the constructions that we used
in [50,55] and are omitted for the sake of brevity.) 2
Summing Up What Has Been Done in this Appendix : We have
outlined abbreviated proofs showing that the Ax-3 and Ax-4 encodings for
IΣ0 satisfy the semantic tableaux versions of the Second Incompleteness Theorem. We visited this topic twice because the result is easier to establish for
Ax-4, although it is stronger for Ax-3. (The latter is stronger because Ax-3
contains one less axiom sentence than Ax-4.) Both our results for Ax-3 and
Ax-4 are interesting because these formalisms are anti-thresholds for the Herbrandized version of the Second Incompleteness while they are thresholds when
the paradigm is changed to focus upon semantic tableaux style deduction.
We close this appendix by once again reminding the reader that a different
type of axiomatic setting where semantic tableaux and Herbrandized proofs
have a sharp difference in length was formalized by Kolodziejczyk in [18,19].
(In particular, Kolodziejczyk [18,19] focused his discussion on Buss’s bounded
arithmetic of [5].)
29

References

[1] Z. Adamowicz, “Herbrand Consistency and Bounded Arithmetic”, Fundamenta
Mathematica 171 (2002) 279-292.
[2] Z. Adamowicz and T. Bigorajska, “Existentially Closed Structures and Gödel’s
Second Incompleteness Theorem”, Journal of Symbolic Logic 66 (2001), 349-356.
[3] Z. Adamowicz and P. Zbierski, “On Herbrand consistency in weak theories”,
Archive for Mathematical Logic 40 (2001) pp. 399-413.
[4] A. Bezboruah and J. Shepherdson, “Gödel’s Second Incompleteness Theorem for
Q”, Journal of Symb Logic 41 (1976) 503-512.
[5] S. Buss, Bounded Arithmetic, in Proof Theory Lecture Notes, Vol. 3, published
by Bibliopolis, Naples, 1986.
[6] S. Buss and A. Ignjatovic, “Unprovability of Consistency Statements in Frag. of
Bounded Arithmetic”, Annals Pure and Applied Logic 74 (1995)221-244.
[7] M. Davis, Computability and Unsolvability McGraw Hill 1983.
[8] M. Davis, H. Putnam and J. Robinson, “The Decision Problem for Exponential
Diophantine Equations”, Annals of Mathematic 74 (1961) pp. 425-436.
[9] S. Feferman, “Arithmetization of Mathematics in a General Setting”,
Fundamenta Mathematica 19 (1960) pp. 35-92.
[10] H. Gaifman and C. Dimitracpoulos, Fragments of Peano Arithmetic and
the MDRP Theorem, Logic and Algorithms, Monagraphies de l’Ensignment
Mathamtique, 30 (1982) pp. 197-206.
[11] K. Gödel, “ Über formal unentscheidbare Sätse der Principia Mathematica und
Verwandte Systeme I”, Monatshefte für Math. Phys. 37 (1931) pp. 349-360.
[12] P. Hájek, On Interpretability in Set Theory, Part I in Comm, Math, Univ. Carol
Volume 12 (1971) pp. 73–79 and Part II in Volume 13 (1972) pp. 445-455.
[13] P. Hájek and P. Pudlák, Metamathematics of First Order Arithmetic, Springer
Verlag 1991.
[14] J. Herbrand, Recherches sur la theorie de la demonstration, Travaux de la
Soceite et des Lettres de Varsvoie III 33 pp. 33-160 (1930).
[15] D. Hilbert and P. Bernays, Grundlagen der Mathematic, Springer 1939.
[16] R. Kaye, Models of Peano Arithmetic, Oxford University Press, 1991.
[17] S. Kleene, “On the Notation of Ordinal Numbers”, Journal of Symbolic Logic
3 (1938), pp. 150-156.
[18] L.A. Kolodziejczyk, “Some results on Weak Consistency Statements in Weak
Theories”, talk at the JAF25 conference in Clermon-Ferrand (2006) whose slides
are available at hhtp://www.cs.us.es/glm/jaf25-CMBFD/slides-lk.pdf.

30

[19] L.A. Kolodziejczyk, “On the Herbrand Notion of Consistency for Finitely
Axiomatizable Fragments of Bound Arithmetic”, Journal of Symbolic Logic 71
(2006) pp. 624-638.
[20] J. Krajı́cek, “A Note on Proofs of Falsehood”, Archive for Math Logic 26 (1987)
169-176.
[21] J. Krajı́cek, Bounded Propositional Logic and Complexity Theory, Cambridge
Unniversity Press, 1995.
[22] G. Kreisel and G. Takeuti, “Formally Self-Referential Propositions for Cut-Free
Classical Analysis”, Dissertationes Mathematicae 118 (1974) pp. 1–55
[23] M. H. Löb, A Solution to a Problem by Leon Henkin, JSL 20(1955) pp 115-118
[24] Y. Matiyasevich, Hilbert’s Tenth Problem, MIT Press (1993)
[25] E. Nelson, Predicative Arithmetic, Math Notes, Princeton Press, 1986.
[26] J. Paris and C. Dimitracopoulos, “Truth definitions for ∆0 formulae”,
Monagraphie de L’Enseignement Mathematique 30 (1982) pp. 317-329.
[27] J. Paris and C. Dimitracopoulos, A Note on the Undefinability of Cuts, Journal
of Symbolic Logic 48 (1983) pp. 564–569.
[28] J. Paris and A. Wilkie, “∆0 Sets and Induction”, 1981 Jadswin Conference
Proceedings, (Leeds University Press) pp. 237-248.
[29] P. Pudlák, Some Prime Elements in the Lattice of Interpretability Types,
Transactions of the American Mathematical Society 280 (1983) pp. 255-275
[30] P. Pudlák, “On Lengths of Proofs of Finisitic Consistency Statements in First
order Theories”, Logic Colloquium 84, North Holland (1986) pp. 165-196.
[31] P. Pudlák, “Cuts, Consistency Statements and Interpretations”, Journal of
Symbolic Logic 50 (1985) 423-442
[32] P. Pudlák, “On the Lengths of Proofs of Consistency”, in The Collegium
Logicum: The Offical 1996 Annals of Kurt Gödel Society ( Volume 2), SpringerWien-NewYork, pp. 65-86.
[33] S. Salehi, Herbrand Consistency in Arithmetics with Bounded Induction, Polish
Academy of Sciences Ph D thesis, October 2001.
[34] C. Smoryński, “The Incompleteness Theorem”, The Handbook on Mathematical
Logic, 1977, North Holland, pp. 821–865.
[35] C. Smoryński, “Non-standard Models and Related Developments in the Work
of Harvey Friedman”, in Harvey Friedman’s Research in Foundations of Math.,
North Holland 1985, pp. 179-220.
[36] R. Solovay, Private telephone conversations between Robert Solovay and
Dan Willard (during April of 1994) concerning Solovay’s generalization of
one of Pudlák’s theorems [31], using also some of Nelson’s and Wilkie-Paris’s

31

methodologies [25,46]. Solovay’s unpublished theorem shows that essentially no
axiom system that recognizes Successor(x) = x + 1 as a total function (and
which treats multiplication and addition as 3-way relations) can prove a theorem
affirming its own consistency under Hilbert deduction. The Appendix A of [49]
offers a 4-page interpretation of the intuition behind Solovay’s unpublished idea.
[37] V. Švejdar, Modal Analysis of Generalized Rosser Sentences, Journal of
Symbolic Logic 48 (1983) pp. 986-999.
[38] S. Swierczkowski, Finite Sets and Gödel’s
Dissertationes Mathematicae 422 (2003) pp. 1–58

Incompleteness

Theorem

[39] G. Takeuti, “On a Generalized Logical Calculus”, Japan Journal of Mathematics
23 (1953) pp. 39–96.
[40] G. Takeuti, “Gödel Sentences of Bounded Arithmetic”, Journal of Symbolic
Logic 65 (2000) pp. 1338-1346
[41] A. Tarski, A. Mostowski and R. M. Robinson, Undecidable Theories, North
Holland, 1953.
[42] A. Visser, An Inside View of Exp (or The Closed Fragment of The Provability
Logic I∆0 +Ω1 With a Propositional Constant for Exp), Journal of Symbolic Logic
57 (1992) pp. 131–165
[43] A. Visser, “The Unprovability of Small Inconsistency”, Archive for
Mathematical Logic 32 (1993) pp. 275-298.
[44] A. Visser, “Faith and Falsity”, Annals Pure & Applied Logic 131 (2005), pp.
103-131.
[45] P. Vopěnka and P. Hájek, Existence of a Generalized Semantic Model of
Gödel-Bernays Set Theory, Bulletin de l’Academie Polonaise des Sciences,
Mathmatiques, Astromiques et Physiques 12 (1973) pp.1079-1086.
[46] A. Wilkie and J. Paris, “On the Scheme of Induction for Bounded Arithmetic”,
Annals of Pure and Applied Logic (35) 1987, 261-302
[47] D. Willard, “Self-Verifying Axiom Systems”, Third Kurt Gödel Colloq (1993),
Springer-Verlag LNCS#713, 325-336.
[48] D. Willard, “The Semantic Tableaux Version of the Second Incompleteness
Theorem Extends Almost to Robinson’s Arithmetic Q”, Springer Verlag
LNCS#1847, July 2000, pp. 415-430.
[49] D. Willard, “Self-Verifying Systems, the Incompleteness Theorem and the
Tangibility Principle”, in Journal of Symbolic Logic 66 (2001) pp. 536-596.
[50] D. Willard, “How to Extend The Semantic Tableaux And Cut-Free Versions of
the Second Incompleteness Theorem Almost to Robinson’s Arithmetic Q”, in
Journal of Symbolic Logic 67 (2002) pp. 465–496.

32

[51] D. Willard, “A Version of the Second Incompleteness Theorem For Axiom
Systems that Recognize Addition But Not Multiplication as a Total Function”,
First Order Logic Revisited, Logos Verlag (Berlin) 2004, pp. 337–368.
[52] D. Willard, “An Exploration of the Partial Respects in which an Axiom System
Recognizing Solely Addition as a Total Function Can Verify Its Own Consistency”,
Journal of Symbolic Logic 70 #4 (2005) pp. 1171-1209.
[53] D. Willard, “On the Available Partial Respects in which an Axiomatization
for Real Valued Arithmetic Can Recognize its Consistency”, Journal of Symbolic
Logic 71 pp. 1189-1199.
[54] D. Willard, “A Generalization of the Second Incompleteness Theorem and Some
Exceptions to It”, Annals of Pure and Applied Logic 141 (2006) pp. 472-496.
[55] D. Willard, “Passive Induction and a Solution to a Paris-Wilkie Open
Question”, Annals of Pure and Applied Logic 146 (2007) pp. 124-149.
[56] C. Wrathall, “Rudimentary Predicates and Relative Computation”, Siam J. on
Computing 7 (1978), pp. 194-209.

33

