Self-Verifying Axiom Systems
and the Incompleteness Theorem
D. Willard
Technical Report 93-10

Computer Science Department
University at Albany
State University of New York
1400 Washington Avenue

Albany, NY 12222

A 12-page abbreviated version of this paper, entitled Self-Verifying Axiom Systems, was published
on 25 August 1993 in the Proceedings of the Third Kurt Godel Symposium pp. 325-336 (published as
Springer-Verlag LNCS # 713). This new longer draft has been issued as SUNY-Albany Comp. Science
TR 93-10.

Self-Verifying Axiom Systems and the Incompleteness Theorem
Dan E, Willard

*

University at Albany
Abstract: We introduce some weak First Order axiom systems which can simultaneously
verify their own consistency and prove more I; theorems than Peano Arithmetic. The rule of
inference used by these axiom systems may be semantic tableaux, or any other cut-free deduction method. These systems will not violate Godel’s Incompleteness Theorem essentially
because they will treat non-zero division, rather than multiplication, as a total function.

The

definition of self-consistency employed in this paper may be either knowledge of the nonexistence of a proof of 0=1 ora strong version of the 2, reflection principle. Our systems
can be modified to support Gentzen-style deduction with cuts,

if Subtraction and Division

replace Addition and Multiplications as the declared total functions. We also prove that these
results do not generalize when I], reflection is present, and show that certain versions of our
axiom system become inconsistent when multiplication replaces division as one of the formally
defined atomic functions.

Most of the material in this paper is quite technical, but Sections 1 thru 4 were written so
that they should be comprehensible to a skilled researcher with a more modest background in
Logic.

NOTE TO THE READER: This paper is not quite as long as its paper weight might suggest. The
formal theorem proving is only 20 pages long (pp. 13-32). The remainder consists mostly of an
informal 12-page intuitive introduction and a 16-page description of the formal Godel encoding of
IS(A) (in Appendix A). The latter Godel encoding was inserted into this article only for the sake of
completeness: A reader can fully understand the gist without delving into Appendix A.

*Partially funded by NSF Grants CCR-90-60509 and CCR-93-02920.
Author’s Address: Computer Science Department, State University of New York at Albany,
Albany, NY 12222.

1400 Washington Ave.,

1. Introduction:

Define an axiom system A

i)

one of the theorems implied by A

ii)

the axiom system is in fact consistent.

to be self-verifying iff

is the statement of its own consistency,

and

Rogers has noted that Kleene’s Fixed Point Theorem implies that every recursively enumerable
axiom system

A

can be easily expanded into a broader system

[K138,R067].

The catch is that

A°

A*

which satisfies condition (i)

can be inconsistent even while it asserts its own consistency,

hence violating condition (ii). This problem arises not only in Godel’s paradigm,
least the strength of Peano Arithmetic (PA),
weaker than PA.

For instance,

where A

has at

but also for many axiom systems which are much

it is known that even weakened axiom systems that include only

PA's £? — Induction Principle can not be self-verifying [Fe88,Sm83], and [Bu86] provides proofs of
some versions of Godel’s Second Theorem for certain very weak cut-free systeins.
Examples of self-verifying axiom systems in the prior literature appear in [Bo79,

Kr71,

KT74,

Ro67,

Ta53].

Je71,

Fe60,

It is difficult to make exact comparisons between our proposed IS(A)

system and any of the previous self-verifying systems because Godel’s Incompleteness Theorem
requires that every self verifying system must breach in

Hilbert-Bernays conditions [Me87].

The breach,

some

way one of the three fundamental

which can be very subtle,

may arise because of

either the axiom system employed or the choice of deduction method, but not necessarily due to
both. For instance, [Fe60] illustrates a self-verifying system which employs all the axioms of Peano
Arithmetic, but which draws upon a deduction method which captures the numerical but not intensional definition of classic deduction. The IS(A) formalism, studied by us, will be a class of First

. Order self-verifying systems which can prove more

II,

theorems than Peano Arithmetic and simul-

taneously rely upon a deduction method as natural as semantic tableaux.
from becoming inconsistent, several of the

axioms of Peano Arithmetic,

the multiplication function is total, are weakened under IS(A).

However to preclude IS(A)
including the axiom that

[Ta53,KT74] have illustrated some

fascinating Second Order cut-free self-verifying systems which can prove all the translated mappings
of the theorems of Peano Arithmetic into a second order language.
Robert Solovay [S094] recently proved a new version of Godel’s Incompleteness Theorem,
shortly after leaming of our work.
tem,

Solovay’s theorem implies that it is impossible for an axiom sys-

satisfying both parts of the definition of self verification,

to prove all Peano Arithmetic’s

theorems about the Subtraction and Non-zero Division functions while simultaneously:

IT,

ge
a)

employing a Gentzen-style deduction method

WITH A CUT RULE,

b)

recognizing Addition (or even successor) as a total function.

Solovay’s Theorem is the almost direct complement to our Propositions

and

1 & 7,

in that these

theorems show that self-verifying axioms systems can be constructed when either condition (a) or
(b) is relaxed.

Propositions 2 thru 6 will further tighten our results by clarifying
1)

what types of reflection principles are and are not compatible with self verification.

2)

in what sense is a total multiplication function incompatible with a cut-free self-verifying
axiom system.
Every

self-verifying axiom systems will be of course subject to very tight limits upon its per-

missible strength, by the limits imposed by the Godel Incompleteness Theorem. From this perspective, Feferman draws the distinction between an intensionally and numerically correct definition of
deduction,

Solovay’s new theorem imposes strict limits on self-verifying systems using Gentzen-

Style deductive cuts,

and it is well known that no self-verifying formalism can satisfy the three

Hilbert-Bernays conditions [HB39,Me87].

But yet on the other hand, human beings appear to implicitly presume ( at some type of weak
level

2?) their own consistency when they reason because otherwise it is awkward ( if not impossi-

ble 7?) to justify the mental energy expended during cogitation. Thus, it is a valid research topic to
investigate how powerful, in the light of Godel’s Theorem, can self-verifying systems become ?

2. General Perspectives:
This section will define the general Introspective Semantics (IS),

proving their own consistency.

which shall be capable of

Let A denote a recursive axiom system. Then the axiom system

IS(A) will consist essentially of the following three groups of axioms.
1)

an initial axiom group defining a preliminary set of functions and relations,

2)

the statement that all IT, theorems (defined formally on the next page), proven by ‘‘the inner
axiom system’’

3)

A, are true;

the statement that the full system IS(A),

including this third sentence,

is consistent. (Several

alternate means for formalizing this “self-verification assertion” will be explored.)
Our chief goal will be to assure that if A is consistent then it will automatically follow that IS(A) is
also consistent.

As noted in section 1, there are many examples of well-defined axiom systems

ae
which assert their own consistency but which are inconsistent. An example is PA’ which consists of
all the axioms of Peano Arithmetic (PA) plus the assertion

"Peano Arithmetic is consistent,

is the combination of Peano Arithmetic with this last statement”

[Ro67].

and so

Our main theorem will

show that IS(A) does not suffer an inconsistency problem analogous to PA’.
Point

F(Xy

of Clarification:

Say

f(x,,X2,..:X,)

X25 ony Xq) S Max( x1, Xz, .-.X_),

is a non-growth

and call f(x,,X2,....%,)

All our formalisms will employ non-growth functions,

function

iff it satisfies

a growth function otherwise.

such as Subtraction and non-zero Division.

The difficulty in proving IS(A) satisfies part (ii) of the definition of ‘‘self-verification’’ will increase
dramatically as one extends IS(A)’s Group-1 Axioms to include more growth functions.

Thus,

our

systems will fall into three categories depending on whether they have no growth functions,

permit

Addition as a function, or recognize both Multiplication and Addition as total functions.

It will be

only the first category of self-verifying systems,

analyzed in Proposition 7, that will be capable of

permitting Gentzen-style deductive cuts without becoming inconsistent.

Solovay’s Theorem will

imply that these systems can not be extended to include even a Successor function. Propositions 1-4
will show that there are reasonable examples of self-verifying systems that recognize Addition as a
function, provided cut-free deduction is employed.

Proposition 6 will show that there are examples

of cut-free IS(A) systems becoming inconsistent when Multiplication is added to their Group-1 functions!
Added Introductory Comment: The results,

mentioned above,

are quite unlike Presburger

Arithmetic because IS(A) will recognize non-zero Division as a total function

(and hence can view

Multiplication as a well-defined partial function).
We will now define IS(A) formally.

Since it will be desirable to view subtraction and division

as total functions over the set of non-negative integers, x-y
and x/0
nate

is defined to equal zero when

is defined to equal zero. In five of our seven main theorems, the symbol

IS(A)’s set of Group-1 axioms.

Go

xSy,

will desig-

The eight formally defined functions of Gg will consist of

Addition, Subtraction, Division, plus the following further functions:
i)

StringCount (x,y,j) = the number of repetitions of the j-bit

binary encoding of the integer y in

x

when one views x as a sequence of j-bit alphabet symbols of length = flog> (x+1)/j].
ii)

Shift (x, y) designating the integer z = x/2”.

iii) | Extract (x,y,z) designating the integer w which stores the same values as x between bit-positions y and z,
and stores zeroes everywhere else.
;
iv)

Andreverse(x,y,i,j) designating the string obtained by reversing x’s sequence of bits between the
addresses i and j and then taking the bitwise AND of the result with y.

v)

Address(x,y,z,i,j) indicating the least k S$ [log x] /j where if s is a string enumerating x’s first kj
bits then StingCount(s,y,j) - StringCount(s,z,j) = i (if such k exists), and Address(x,y,z,i,j) = 0 otherwise

-4-

Other axioms in Gg
statement

Vx:x+1#x,

k=k-141

and for each integer constant k=

1, 2. cu .y

the two special axioms

and Vx x<k 3 x=OVx=1V +++ Vx=k-1.

Notation:
dvsz

will include the definitions of the usual relations equality and greater-than, the

or

An existential or universal quantifier will be called bounded iff it occurs in a form
WvSz,

where

z

symbol.

A _ wff

(x; X2 *** Xj), whose only free variables are x; x2 *** x; will be called a Ap formula

iff all its

universal and existential

quantifiers are bounded.

iSj,

canonical form of a II;

and

£,

denotes

either

a

constant

or

variable

Given such a Ag formula

®

and

the

formula is defined as Vx, V x2 °+- Vx; : B(x, x2 °** xj) and

"xy 3xQ 65+ 3x, 2 P(x, xQ °° x;). A sentence will be defined as a formula with no free variables,

and the Ag, 2, II; and I, sentences will thus be defined accordingly.
Formal Definition of the Axiom Group Go : The axiom indicating that the addition function
is total can obviously be written as a IT, sentence.
functions,

Since all Go’s other functions are non-growth

its remaining axioms can be written as I], sentences.

Any

finite set of II; axioms,

validly defining Go’s functions and relations, is adequate.
Define a first-order axiom system

A to be nice iff A

is consistent with the Group-1 axioms

of IS and there exists a Ap formula Axa(y) expressing that y is the Godel number of an axiom of A.
For technical reasons,
resolution,

it is convenient to view all encodings of proofs as one of semantic tableaux,

or cut-free sequent calculus. The Godel Completeness Theorem [Go30] holds for each of

these methods [Be56,Fi90,Ge69,Sc56,Sm68,Ta87].

tableaux proofs.

For simplicity,

we rely mostly on the semantic

Prf,(x,y) will thus denote the Ap formula asserting that y is a semantic tableaux

proof of x from a nice system A. Since Turing(a,b,c) and Axa(d) are both Ag formulae, it will be
possible to encode Prf,(x,y) as a Ay formula, as Section 5 and its Appendix will explain.
In our discussion, Pra(x) denotes the formula "Sy Prf,(x,y)",

and

[>]

denotes ©’s Godel

number. For each Il sentence ®, the second axiom group will contain one sentence of the form:

Pra( [01 )>@

(2.1)

Note (2.1) is Tl, (when written in prenex normal form) because Prf,(x,y) is Ap
In its simplest form,

the third axiom group of IS(A) consists of a single sentence asserting

"The union of the first two groups of axioms with this very sentence forms a consistent set of

axioms."

This self-referential sentence is known to be well defined via fixed point operators (see

(Ro67,Je71]).
proofs

(We will formally define it in the Appendix to Section 5.)

in this paper

are conducted

in the

semantic

tableaux

formalism

As noted before,
[Fi90,Sm68].

all

In this

aie
formalism,

an inconsistency proof is a semantic tableaux whose axioms are those of IS(A),

all paths of the semantic tableaux are closed.

where

If L is the empty sentence (or equivalently the state-

ment 0 = 1 ) then self-consistency can be formalized as the statement:

Vy — PrfiscayC y)

(2.2)

The first theorem of this paper, stated formally in the next section, asserts that if A is nice then
IS(A) must be consistent. This paper will contain six other theorems.

Our result would not be very

strong if (2.2) was the sole respect in which this paper established self-consistency (because in the
special context of weak cut-free axiom systems assertion (2.2) is not ideally informative). Our formal
results are listed in the next section. The remainder of this section will explain intuitively why

IS

treats addition as a function, but multiplication only as a relation.
The axiom system
sistency.

For simplicity,

b bits of memory.
than 2>,

IS was intended to enable computerized algorithms to prove their own conlet us temporarily assume our formal system is a finite state machine with

Then the formal system will be technically unable to construct integers larger

Thus in one sense, assertion (2.3) can be viewed as iricorrect because z can exceed 2° when

x and y are b-bit integers exceeding 2°-!.
VxVydz:z=xty
Nevertheless,
(2.3),

(2.3)

there will be another very different,

somewhat informal interpretation of Equation

where the expression can be viewed as valid,

even when the variables x, y and z have fixed

bounded domains.

Let us interpret (2.3) as stating whenever our finite state machine has enough

storage space to ask the question “What is the value of x + y?", it also has enough memory available
to store the answer.

In particular,

since the symbol "+" must require at least one bit of storage,

variables x and y must require fewer than b—1 bits,

the

implying there is sufficient space in a b-bit

memory to store their sum z.
The analog of (2.3)

is, surprisingly,

inapplicable to multiplication.

Vxsziz
Then if x = 27/4,

Consider the equation

= x*x

(2.4)

the right hand side of (2.4) can be stored in fewer than b bits of memory while

z>2° can not be! At first, it may appear that this counterexample is artificial because it requires at
least two occurrences of the same variable x on the right sides of (2.4) to force

z> 2°. However, the

proof of Godel’s Incompleteness Theorem used essentially the same double appearance of a variable
when it provided a counterexample to self-verification via a diagonalization argument.

One of our

ais
theorems will show that the classic paradigm,

where an axiom system becomes automatically incon-

Sistent as soon as it proves its own consistency, is inapplicable to the cut-free versions of IS.
The axiom family IS(A),

can be intuitively regarded as a class of structures, lying halfway

between Peano Arithmetic and Presburger Arithmetic,
Incompleteness Theorem.

That is,

which satisfy Godel’s First but not Second

since the predicate Turing (x,y,z) is expressible under IS(A),

there clearly can exist no decision procedure for classifying the theorems provable from IS(A).
the other hand, unlike Peano Arithmetic,

On .

the various versions of IS(A) will be able to verify their

own consistency.
Moreover from at least some perspectives,

matic computation by viewing

@(w)

IS does not lose much information relevant to prag-

multiplication as not being a function. Consider the example

=

{Vx<¥w

Vy<Vw

Then IS(Peano) can prove the sentence Vw ®(w)

Jz<w:

z=x*y}

(2.5)

(by using the Group-2 axioms and the fact that

this sentence is provable in Peano Arithmetic). This example and its many generalizations illustrate
that although IS(Peano) can not prove multiplication formally to be a function, it will still be able to
treat multiplication as a function in a wide class of concrete applications involving integers (see *).
Or to be more precise,

the preceding paragraph and footnote illustrate at least one reasonable

criteria for examining the pragmatic.

They are not meant to imply that other equally reasonable cri-

teria would not find IS(Peano) to be lacking.

To the contrary,

in a context where the Incomplete- ©

ness Theorem indicates that every axiom system either fails to prove its consistency or fails to meet
the full Hilbert-Bernays conditions,

this would not be a reasonable expectation.

Another way to motivate the axiom system

IS is to consider a philosopher’s response to the

question of whether multiplication is a function.

His first answer would likely be “of course yes".

But if one then asked the philosopher to construct a sequence of natural numbers a, a1, a2, 43 ...
where ap 2 2 and aj4; = (a;)*, a hedge would quickly follow because a, requires at least 2" bits. The
expected response would then be that “multiplication is a function in theory but not always in practice".

Note that the philosopher would not give such a quick answer about addition because the

sequence bp, by, b2, b3 ... with bj,; =b, +b;

is characterized by proofs of the existence of b,

* The point is that concrete applications (or at least very concrete applications) can usually be encoded so that some type
of approximate analog of w bounds all the pertaining multiplicative products z when one encodes the problem in a
suitably reasonable form. It is extremely rare for a pragmatic application to involve numbers so large that some type of
analog of w is unavailable for all possible natural encodings of the problem 1 (Also, it should be noted that IS
can represent floating point multiplication as a total function, provided some form of constraints are present on the bitlength of the mantissa.)

nfs
requiring more bits than b,’s binary encoding (in cut-free proof systems where the Principle of
Induction is unavailable).
binary encoding when

This means there will always be adequate memory for writing

there is sufficient memory

b,’s

for storing a semantic tableaux proof of its

existence (whereas the same is plainly not true when multiplication is assumed to be a function).
For instance, multiplication allows one to establish the existence of a number a399_
with approximately

300 lines),

atoms in the universe.

(in a proof

whose binary encoding requires more digits than the number of

In sharp contrast,

even the full cardinality of the universe is insufficient to

construct a cut-free proof from the Addition Axioms of the existence of a number whose bit length is
as large as the universe.

(The caveats that the Principle of Induction is absent and that cut-free

deduction is employed are necessary for the preceding metaphor to retain meaning.)
The seven main theorems of this paper will generalize this metaphor by showing how the fast
growth properties of the multiplication function prevents cut-free axiom
verifying.

As an over-simplified metaphor,

systems from being self- .

our IS(A) system shall circumvent these difficulties by

adopting the perspective of the philosopher who declares “multiplication is a function in theory but
not always in practice".

aspect,

Thus,

the inner axiom system A of IS(A) corresponds to the theoretical

which can view multiplication as a function.

On the other hand,

the outer three groups of

IS(A)’s axioms stopped just short of recognizing multiplication as a function,
““fast-prowing’’ sequence ao, a), 42, a3 ... forcing IS(A)

The last paragraph called the preceding examples
are applicable only to cut-free systems.

so as to preclude a

to become inconsistent.

‘‘over-simplified metaphors’’ because they

These metaphors lose meaning when cuts are present

because Addition can then be employed to implicitly define a sequence that grows actually faster than
ag, 4y, 42, a3 ..... Solovay’s proof that IS(A) is incompatible with deductive cuts [S094] rests on this

fast growth property.

(Actually,

IS(A)

can support a cut mle for Ag

sentences,

and Solovay’s

theorem relies on the cut rule for sentences with unbounded quantifiers.)
Finally,

it should be reiterated that the preceding metaphors were intended only to help |

motivate the subject matter.

They offer an accurate description of cut-free systems,

but are over-

simplistic when cuts are present. The true direction of this article will not be apparent until after the
next chapter lists and explains the significance of our seven main theorems. By studying IS(A),
seekto learn to what precise extent can one formalize the notion of self-consistency.
and negative results will be derived,

in regards to which deductive methods,

ciples, and what type of growth functions IS(A) can and cannot support.
Equation (2.2),

we

Both positive

which reflection prin-

It should be stressed that

in isolation, is a fairly weak form of the assertion of self-consistency.

The seven

-8theorems,

listed in the next section,

offer a much better summary of our results.

3. Formal Summary of Main Results:
Section 6 of this paper will prove:
Proposition 1: For each nice axiom system

A,

A disadvantage

such

to weak

axiom

systems,

IS(A) is consistent.

as

JIS(A),

is that several

definitions of consistency, which are equivalent under Peano Arithmetic,
under IS(A).

conventional

are not also equivalent

Thus, most of this paper will attempt to generalize Proposition 1 for stronger notions

of self-verification than was indicated by Equation (2.2).
Some added notation is needed.

The symbol PA+ will denote the natural generalization of

Peano Arithmetic that includes the eight atomic functions from IS’s Group-1 axioms.

The symbol

IS§(A, G) will denote the generalization of IS(A) where d is the deduction method employed,

an arbitrary set of Group-1 axioms and
self-verification statement.

G

is

s is some type of Group-3 class providing some type of

Whenever we omit one or more of the symbols d,

G or

s from

IS§(A, G), they will assume the default definitions given in Section 2.
The local reflection statement for a sentence ® and fixed axiom system B is the assertion:

Prp([®]) >

(3.1)

Some articles omit the word “local” when referring to reflection principles.
We will also study four stronger

(and more “uniform")

Let @(v) denote a formula with only

v free, and

(3.4) will be called B’s first uniform,

second uniform

and

semi-uniform

reflection principles for ®

(3.2)

Vv (Pra( Id, 1) > &(v)}

(3.3)

Define an existential quantifier to be bounded by y

to be bounded by

denote the sentence ®(i). Then Eq. (3.2) thu

(Vv Pra( 1, 1)} > Vv ®(v)

Pra( [Vv &(v)1) >,

is a Z; sentence, define }

&,

versions of the reflection principle.

to be a modified

for all fixed integers i

(3.4)

iff it is an expression similar to Ju<y.

If ®,

form of ®, which requires all its existential quantifiers

y. The strong-uniform ~, reflection principle for an axiom system

B

is the

statement that all Z, formulae P(v) satisfy

Vv Wy {Prfg([®)1,y) > 3}

(3.5)

%Lob’s Theorem states that traditional axiom systems are unable to prove any of their reflection
principles,
them.

except for in the degenerate case where the right side of the implicant is provable by

See [Bo79]

for an extremely simple proof of Lob’s Theorem

[Lo55,

Me87],

and [Fe62,

Sm83] for a discussion of when the first and second uniform principles are equivalent.
Proposition 2 thru 4 (below) illustrate that introspective axiom systems support reflection properties more

fully than traditional axiom

reflection principles represent a much

systems.

These theorems

are important because the

stronger form of self-verification than Equation (2.2). (See

footnote * for an intuitive explanation.)
Proposition 2. (proven in Section 7)
by Lob’s Theorem,

a)

In contrast to the conventional axiom systems discussed

IS(PA+) can prove

its local reflection statements for every Ag sentence,

b) _ its local reflection statement for the subset of I], sentences ‘¥ which are decidable,

c)

its semi-uniform reflection statement whenever D; in Equation (3.4) is Ao.

Proposition 3.

(proven in Section 8)

Define Is™ (A) as an axiom system whose Group-1 and

Group-2 axioms are identical to those of IS(A) and where Group-3 now includes the stronger assertion that IS™ (A)’s strong-uniform reflection property is valid for all £, formulae.

Then for any nice

A, IS™(A) is consistent.
Proposition 4.

(proven in Section 9)

The system Is” (PA+)

(as well as Is’

(PA+) and

is°™ (PA+) defined in Remark 1) can prove ®’s semi-uniform reflection statements when ®, is X, .

Remark 1. Define IS“ (A), Is“ ™(A), ISY ™(A) and IS" “°(A) to be four alternate axiom systems whose Group 3 axioms instead assert their local Ap reflection, local , reflection, second uniform ,

reflection,

and second uniform Ag reflection properties,

respectively.

Since each of these

systems are weaker than Is™ (A), Proposition 3 immediately implies their consistencies. Also,
positions

Pro-

2 & 4 generalize for any A which is an extension of PA+.

Proposition 5 and 6 (below) are negative results. They illustrate respects in which each of Pro-

positions 2, 3 and 4 can not be strengthened. In particular, they show that the addition of either IT,
reflection or the multiplication function to the preceding systems will produce inconsistencies!
* Equation (2.2) merely indicates that IS(A) knows it can not prove -L. This does not automatically guarantee that upon
proving yD,

IS(A) can automatically infer that it can not prove @.

It needs access to some reflection principle, such

as for example Equation (3.1) with B = IS(A), to conclude the latter from the proof of —P

|

-10-

Proposition 5. (proven in Section 11) Let ise™ (A) denote an axiom system whose Group-1
and Group-2 axioms are again identical to those of IS(A),
ist

but where Group-3 now asserts that the

(A)’s Local Reflection Property is valid for all II, sentences.

Then there exists nice A where

1s ™ (A) is inconsistent. (An example of a nice system forcing introspective inconsistencies in Propositions 5 & 6 is PA+,
Proposition 6.

or any extension of it.)
(proven in Section 12) Let G,, denote an extension of Gg which contains

the added axiom that the multiplication function is total.
Is” 40(A) = 1s"

(A,Go) was consistent for all nice A.

Recall that Remark

1 indicated that

Nevertheless, there do exist nice

A

where

1s¥ “9A G,,) is inconsistent. (This result obviously applies also to ISU ™(A,G,,) and IS“ (A,Gm),
since the latter two axioms systems are extensions of 1s¥ 400A G..).)

The most surprising facet of the preceding results is the contrast between Proposition 5, which
asserts that introspective axiom systems are incompatible with even a weak form of Nl, reflection,
and the quite close approximations to IT, reflection established in Propositions 2c and 4. (See also
Section 9 for the more general partial reflexive implications of proofs of II, theorems.)
In all six of the preceding theorems,

the subscript d in IS§(A, G) was omitted,

deduction corresponded by default to semantic tableaux.

indicating the

It is trivial to generalize Propositions 1-6

for the cases where d corresponds to resolution [Fi90] and the cut-free sequent calculus [Ta87],

since these methods exclude unnecessary uses of the Law of the Excluded Middle in a manner analogous to semantic tableaux.
cuts,

The subscript

+ will henceforth denote deduction systems that permit

such as Hilbert systems. (See [Ta87] for a formal definition of cuts.)

Our main theorem about

self-verifying IS, (A) systems appears below:
Proposition 7. Let G_ denote a set of Group-1 axioms identical to Gg except that G_
not include the axiom indicating that Addition is a total function.
is consistent,

does

Then for any nice A, IS,(A, G_)

(Generalizations of Proposition 7 and its proof appear in Section 13.)

As noted in Section

Incompleteness Theorem,
Solovay’s Theorem.

1,

Robert Solovay [So94] discovered a néw version of Godel’s Second

shortly after learning of our results. It is stated below:
There exists a finite set F of the II,

theorems proven in Peano Arith-

metic such that no consistent Gentzen-style sequent calculus system employing cuts can simultane-

ously prove all the theorems of F, recognize Subtraction, non-zero Division and Successor as total
functions, and prove its own consistency.

-]i-

Let G, denote a set of Group-1 axioms identical to Gg and G_

(in Propositions 1 & 7), except

that Successor is the only growth function recognized by G, . Then Solovay’s Theorem implies that

IS,(PA+, G,) is inconsistent.

This fact is quite startling because Solovay’s inconsistent system

IS,(PA+, G,) would be transformed into a consistent system if either
a) deductive cuts were removed from.the formalism (i.e. apply Proposition 1),
b) or if the successor function was removed from G,

Thus,

(i.e. apply Proposition 7).

Solovay’s Theorem and the other negative results in Propositions

different variants of inconsistent axiom systems,

whose formal definitions differ only slightly from

the well-behaved systems in Propositions 1-4 and 7. (Actually,

the fit between Solovay’s Theorem

and Proposition 1 is even tighter than indicated in item (a) because
tule for Ap sentences,

and

2)

IS(PA+)

5 & 6 define three

1) IS(PA+)

can support a cut

recognizes Addition as a total function while

IS, (PA+)

can not tolerate even Successor !-)

One final definition will help further clarify the significance of Propositions 1-4 & 7.
formal system S

B,

satisfies the

Ap

cut-reflection principle iff for any pair of Ag

sentences

Say a
@

S can prove

WxVy : (Prfs(lal,x) A Prig(fa>Bl,y) } > B
Say

and

S satisfies Equation (3.6) in the strong sense iff S’s

structure independent of a and

semantic tableaux proof of (3.6) has a

fB (this means that for any pair of Ag

proof of (3.6) for (a, B’)

will be the same as the proof for (a,f)

of the sentences

in the first proof will be replaced by

a and f

satisfies the strong uniform

Ap

and also for any pair of Ag

formulae (a)

(3.6)

sentences

(a’,f’),

the

except that each appearance

a’ and

f’ .) Lastly, say that S

cut-reflection principle iff the preceding conditions are satisfied,
and ‘Y(b), S can prove the following uniformized gen-

eralization of Equation (3.6) :

Vx Vy VaVb: { Prfs([®,]1,x) A Pris([®,>%
ly) } > ®,
A trivial corollary to Proposition 2a is that IS(PA+)

(3.7)

satisfies the weak form of the Ap

cut-

reflection principle. The proof of this corollary is only two or three sentences long, and it is equally

easy to verify that the systems IS‘“°(PA+) and ISY“°(PA+) (from Remark 1) satisfy the strong
and strong-uniform versions of the

Ag

implies that Proposition 3’s Is™ (PA+)

cut-reflection principle,

respectively.

This result,

in turn,

system satisfies the strong-uniform version of the Ag

cut-

-12reflection principle because 1s” (PA+)

is strictly stronger than 1s’“(PA+).

The results above are surprising because classical axiom systems are incapable of proving any
version of the Ap

cut-reflection principles

(see *). Thus while Solovay’s Theorem indicates that

nearly all our IS(A) systems are incapable of of accommodating a Gentzen-style cut rule for eliminating sentences with unbounded quantifiers, there is nevertheless a different type of Ap cut principle which is compatible with our but not with conventional logic formalisms !!!!
A well-known corollary to the Godel Incompleteness Theorem is that every self-verifying system must violate one of the Hilbert-Bernays conditions [HB39,Me87].
difficulty is that only in the degenerate case where

For the case of IS(A),

x and y are fixed constants can IS(A) prove the

Hilbert-Bernays condition that if x is a proof of « and y is a proof of a>6
some

z that proves

f. This weakness of IS(A),

the

then there exists

together with the other limitations on it imposed

by Solovay’s Theorem and Propositions 5 & 6, clearly illustrate how IS(A) can not fully characterize the complexity of human thought. But on the other hand,

it would also appear to be simplistic

to fully ignore self-verifying systems because humans appear to implicitly presume their consistency

(at some type ? of weak level), for the sake of justifying the energy expended during cogitation.
We suggest that the truth

(7) may possibly lie between these two extremes.

That both the

self-verifying and non-self-verifying perspectives may convey some useful partial insights.
pluralistic view is partially analogous to Godel’s First Incompleteness Theorem,

Such a

which indicates that

no single r.e. axiom system can enumerate all the theorems one desires to learn about arithmetic.
Or at leastin a context where a modest change in a formalism’s definition will cause Propositions 1 thru 7 and Solovay’s Theorem to produce starkly different results,

it appears premature to

develop hasty conclusions, whether positive or negative, about self-verifying systems.
One reason we suspect that it would be premature to dismiss self-verifying axiom systems in
an overly hasty manner is that the preceding discussion has shown how some self-verifying systems
can support Equation (3.7)’s strong uniform

Ag

cut-reflection princible,

while Peano Arithmetic

and all other conventional axiom systems are incompatible with it.
* Consider the example where
© = B = { 0=1 }. A conventional axiom system would be incapable of proving (3.6) forsuch O and B because it would then verify its own consistency !!

-134. Intuition Behind the Proof of Proposition 1

The formal proof of Proposition 1 appears in Section 6. In this section,

we will sketch the

intuition behind the proof. The proof of Proposition 1 will be by contradiction. It will assume that p
is the minimal integer which is a Godel encoding of an inconsistency proof using the axiom system
IS(A),

and show this assumption leads to a contradiction.

The proof utilizes the fact that if A is nice, then all its Group-1 and Group-2 axioms are consistent with each other. Thus p can represent an inconsistency proof only if the final axiom sentence
in Group-3 contradicts the union of the Group-1 and Group-2 axioms.
The single sentence in Group-3 was the statement that "IS(A) is consistent".

Section 6 will

prove that the Group-1 and 2 axioms can contradict this statement only if the proof p constructs
within itself a second "witness integer" p" (not necessarily distinct from p) such that p’ is also a
proof of IS(A)’s inconsistency.
Since p is defined to be the minimal integer encoding a contradiction proof,

it follows that the

witness p° satisfies p’ > p. If IS(A) had included multiplication as a function, it would be possible
for an inconsistency proof p to construct within itself a representation of the necessary p’ > p.
(Essentially, section 2 noted that in strictly fewer than logsp bits, it is possible to encode via multiplication numbers p" 2p.

The construction of p* "inside p" in the proof of Proposition 6 will

employ essentially the the analog of the Eq.

(2.4) implied by Godel’s Incompleteness Theorem.)

However a crucial difference between Propositions 1 and 6 is that the Group-1 Axioms of the former
contain only Addition as a growth function.
the

contradiction

witness

p’

“inside

log (x + y) S MAX (log x, log y) +1.

p".

This restriction makes impossible the construction of
In

particular,

Addition

grows

so

slowly

that

This implies essentially that it is impossible in logap — 1

bits to encode a number as large as p. Using these facts, Section 6 will prove that p cannot possibly be long enough to construct the necessary witness p” 2 p for p to be an inconsistency proof !!
Added Remark.

For the sake of simplicity, we have mentioned only Propositions 1 & 6 dur-

ing the intuitive discussion above.
3, 5, 7 and Solovay’s Theorem.

However,

similar reasoning is necessary to prove Propositions

That is, the positive self-verification results in Propositions 3 & 7

rest on showing that it is impossible to construct the necessary contradiction witness p’ 2 p “inside
p". Similarly,

the negative inconsistency results indicated in Proposition 5 and Solovay’s Theorem

depend ultimately on showing how to construct the contrary witness p’ > p “inside p".

Pe
5. Semantic Tableaux Formalism.

The formal proofs of Propositions 1-7 appear in Sections 6-13 (essentially one proof per section).

The first version of our proofs was conceived using Gentzen’s cut-free sequent calculus nota-

tion.

Later, we observed that our proofs could be simplified significantly,

the semantic tableaux notation [Fi90,Sm68],

if we instead employed

sometimes also called semantic trees,

exceptionally well with Section 6’s notation.

because it mixes

This section will outline the formal encodings of

semantic tableaux proofs and related preliminary information.
One difficulty will be that multiplication (and hence also x* (for fixed exponent
functions under

IS.

4)) are not

Lemma 5.1 illustrates how we can overcome this difficulty by treating

x*

almost as if it was a function!!!

Lemma 5.1. Say a formula ®(x;X2...x,)

is majorized with exponent A iff each universally

and existentially quantified variable v in ®

is required to be less than x;* for some

i<L.

for each majorized formula

there exists an “essentially equivalent”

Ag

W" (xyX9...X_)

‘¥(x,X2...X,)

such that every L-tuple

Informal Proof Sketch.

formula

(ij,i2...i,) satisfies V(i,,i2...i,) = W* (i ,i---iL).

To construct ¥"

3vy <x Svy <x --* Jv <x,

Then

we will replace each Jv<x*

with the sequence

and treat universal quantifiers analogously. Define Y” to be the

natural modification of ‘¥Y when the string

v is so divided into 2A corresponding smaller strings.

(The string v is divided into 2A rather than 2 substrings to avoid round-off errors.) It is obvious
that such a construction will produce a

satisfying Lemma 5.1.

QED

Let El and E2 denote two different methodologies for encoding a proof formalism.
and E2 to be linearly equivalent

Define E1

iff each proof string in El can be translated into a string in E2

(and vice versa), where the translations may increase the lengths of the encodings by no more than a
constant factor.

Lemma

5.1 implies that the

set of Ay

equivalent encodings must be essentially isomorphic.
where multiplication is treated as a function,

formulae for two distinct but linearly

(In the context of conventional axiom systems,

one typically ignores such minute levels of detail.

Lemma 5.1 assures that the absence of a formal multiplication function in IS(A) does not raise any
new complications,

with regards to linearly equivalent encodings.)

Define a byte to be an unit consisting of six bits.

Our encoding of wffs

and proofs will

comprise a string of bytes whose length is essentially guaranteed to be proportional to the length of

-15-

the English language sentence making the same statement (so as to achieve the ideal "linear" bit
compression).

In particular, we will assign special 6-bit codes to the following symbols:

1) _ the standard six logical connectives:
2)

A, V, —, >, V, and J

_ three types of left and right parenthesis symbols: (, ), [, ],
A

3)

five conventional symbols A,

+ constant,
4)

{, and }, and a comma symbol.

A

), é, & and f to denote an atomic formula,

a variable, a fixed

a proof-parameter and a function in a semantic tableaux proof [Fi90].

two special new symbols u# and v#, explained in the next paragraph,
repeatedly storing long constants.

which allows us to omit

Instead, the symbols u# and v# allow us to use the "u" and

"vy" symbols to act as pointers to constants.
Integers

i will be encoded using « Llog 3 iJ +3 bytes (i.e.

Llog 32 iJ + 1 bytes to encode i as a base-32 number,
bol).

one byte to initiate the integer code,

and a final byte serving as a termination sym-

The byte strings oti) and + fi, representing the i-th parameter and variable,

encoded using Log32 iJ +3 bytes.

will be thus

Similarly, the i-th function (with j arguments t, tp --- tj) will

be encoded as f[i,j} (ti, t2 --+ tj], and Afi,j] [ty, tp ~*~ tj] will encode the i-th atomic formula.
The symbol ei] will also have a quite standard meaning,

represents the integer j. If j is a very large number,

it will designate a constant that

then its repeated appearance in a proof could

cause the proof to grow to an unacceptably large size. Therefore, our notation will employ two special symbols to reduce the bit length of a proof. The symbol u#[i, j] may appear in any position normally occupied by the constant symbol
in u#[i,j]’s position,

efi). It will treat the indicated sentence as if €[j] was stored

and also specify that all appearances of O [i] in the subtree descending from

this sentence should be treated as if it was the constant ef) (written only in an abbreviated form).
Similarly the sentence "v#[i, j] ® 0 [i])" is a bit compressed representation for oe [j]).

Part of the

reason for this new notation is explained by Lemma 5.2.
Lemma 5.2. For fixed j and variable ®,

maps the Godel number of [(9[1])]

@

is fixed.

can prove that there exists a function that

onto the Godel number for [v#[1,j]®(?[1])1. Also, it

recognizes a function that maps the byte string

variable and

IS(PA+)

“ ef] "

(The reason for the new

onto

‘‘ v#’’

[v#[1, j]® (Ftp) |

when

j

isa

notation is that the two analogous map-

pings onto [® (efj) | are unknown by IS(PA+) to be total functions ! )

-16’

Proof of Lemma 5.2’s First Sentence. Since PA+
can prove for each
number

FIXED

of the form

j,

there exists some

[®(%[1])]

[v# (1, j]® (ot) 1.

and

Moreover,

kx = x+x+x+...+x).

[o@t])1

FIXED
then

k

Jz<y_

such that Vx Vy if x is a Godel
which

(The verification of this fact is not hard.)

represents a II, theorem of PA+,
IS(PA+).

y =kx

has access to the Principle of Induction, it

IS(PA+)

is the Godel number of

Since the italicized statement

the Group-2 axioms will imply that it is also a theorem of
recognizes

scalar

multiplication

The last two sentences imply that IS(PA+)

onto [v#[1,j] ®(9[1))1

isa total function.

Proof of Lemma 5.2’s Second Sentence.

as

a

total

function

(since

can also prove that the mapping of

QED

Essentially the same as the preceding paragraph,

with the roles of j and ® reversed.
Added Comment: Proofs analogous to the above are used repeatedly in this paper. They will
show how IS(PA+)’s

Group-2 Axioms,

together with the fact that its Group-1

nize scalar multiplication as a total function,

axioms can recog-

identifies other functions which

IS(PA+)

can also

recognize as total. We will return to this subject when Lemma 5.3 discusses the u# notation.
To encode the underlying tree structure of a semantic tableaux proof,

we will need either

pointers or parenthesis to formally represent the parent-child relationship. The terms pointer encodings and parenthesis encodings will refer to these two representations of a tree’s underlying structure. Our results hold for either representation,
is more ideally compressed. , Therefore { P
string

P,

and where

Notation.
“Wx<y”

and the parenthesis notation is preferable because it

{a}

{B}

} denotes a tree whose root stores the byte

{ 0} and { B } describe the possible subtrees descending from this root.

Recall

that a bounded

or ‘*3dx<y’”.

quantifier

is defined

to be an expression

Say an unbounded quantifier is broad iff its range,

indicated by the

symbols "(" and ")", includes all the atoms and bounded quantifiers in the sentences
(Bounded

quantifiers,

by

definition,

will

never

be

Positive Normal Form iff no broad quantifier has a =

‘‘broad’’ .)

Define

similar to

containing

a sentence

to

be

it.
in

symbols to its left. We will often desire to

transform an initial sentence Q into an alternate equivalent sentence written in positive normal form.
The latter will be called the Positive Rewrite of

,

and be denoted as Positive(Q).

It can be

defined as comprising that positive normal sentence which is identical to Q except that:
i)

all of the "4" symbols appearing to the left of Q’s broad quantifiers are removed from Positive(Q)

ii)

to preserve the logical equivalence of Q and Positive(Q) after operation (i) is performed,

a “5"

symbol will be placed to the right of °’s rightmost broad quantifier (if necessary),

and the

"" and "J" symbols in ’s and Positive(Q)’s broad quantifiers are interchanged when necessary.

-17-

For example,

Equation (5.2) is the positive rewrite of (5.1).

aVvdwaVxaAV
JvVwVxdy

y (v=wAdz=xty)

(5.1)

7 (v=wAdz=xty)

(5.2)

General definitions of semantic tableaux proofs can be found in [Fi90,Sm68].

The variant stu-

died in this paper will define a semantic proof of ‘¥ as a tree of sentences where
1)

The root consists of the sentence

Positive(‘\V),

(i.e. it represents the temporary con-

tradiction assumption that ‘Y is false). Each other node consists of an axiom or a deduction from a higher node in the tree using the standard rules [Fi90,Sm68] for eliminating
the logical symbols A, V, >, V and i and right-shifting the position of the symbol —.
These rules are listed in Figure 1. The rule for eliminating existential quantifiers will
require that the node inferring (Gfi]) from 4 v[j] P(v[j]) be the child of the latter and
that no ancestor of these two nodes will have previously introduced the parameter

2)

ili).

Every tree branch is "closed" (by containing both ® and —® for some sentence ®),

Semantic tableaux proofs are known to satisfy the Godel Completeness Theorem [Fi90,

Sm68].

Hence in some sense they have power commensurate to Hilbert-style proofs.
The definitions in this chapter were chosen carefully so that it would be easy to transform a
proof of VG] OA{j) into a proof of ([k]).

Thus,

if the initial axiom system is consistent and

has its axiom sentences written in positive normal form,

then two nodes in V9Gj] oA{j)’s proof tree

must be the root 3 9[j] .®({j]) and its child

4 @(U{i]). A corresponding proof of ®([k]) can

be constructed by replacing these two nodes with —(u#[i,k]).

Since no other changes are neces-

sary, this transformation will increase the proof’s Godel number by no more than a fixed constant
multiplicative factor. This fact will be employed to prove Lemma 5.3.
Lemma

5.3.

Let

transformed proof of
T(p,k)

p

be the Godel number of a proof of V 9G]

@(C[k]),

can be recognized by

as defined above.

For any FIXED

IS(PA+) to be a total function.

recognize the mapping of the byte string " é[k] "onto

AG)

k,

and

T(p,k) denote the

the mapping of p

onto

Likewise for FIXED p, IS(PA+) can

T(p,k) to be a total function.

-18Proof. Both claims of Lemma 5.3 have proofs similar to Lemma 5.2. We will therefore sketch
only the proof of the first claim. Since PA+
mapping of the Godel number

p onto

has the strength of Peano Arithmetic,

T(p,k)

is total and satisfies the inequality

it can prove the
T(p,k) SLy-p

(where Ly, is a constant depending on k).

Hence, PA+

can prove the I], sentence that Vp Vx

x=L‘p

then 4q<x

which is a proof of (CIk]).

and pis a proof of WORT)

Since the italicized statement represents a II, theorem of PA+,

if

the Group-2 axioms will imply

that it is also a theorem of IS(PA+). As before, IS(PA+) will recognize multiplication by any scalar
constant

as a total function

because

Ly, p=ptp+pt...tp.

The

last two

sentences

IS(PA+) can also prove that the mapping of p onto T(p,k) to be a total function.
It should be noted that Lemma 5.3 would not follow,
different definitions

that

QED

had this section employed slightly

u# ), because T(p,k)

SL, p could then fail for

all constants Ly. Our definitions had guaranteed T(p,k) S Ly p because,

under normal human rea-

soning,
VOL

(such as omitting the symbol

imply

the proof of (C[k])
OO[)).

appears to never have much more complexity than the proof of

In any case, even without such a formalism supporting Lemma 5.3, most of our seven

main theorems,

including Propositions 1, 2a, 3, 5, & 7 will remain valid.

A formal 16-page description of the Godel encodings of Prfisca)(x,y) asa Ap formula appears
in Appendix A.

In the remainder of this section,

we will briefly summarize the salient aspects of

Prfjscay(x,
y)’s enncoding.
By applying Lemma 5.1, it is not hard to verify that:
I)

There exists a Ap formula Turing (x, y, z) which states x is an encoding of the first y states of

a Turing Machine whose initial state is z;
I)

If an axiom system A has a Ap formula Ax,(a) indicating that a is an axiom of A,

then there

will exist a Ap formula Prf,(x, y) indicating that y is a semantic tableaux proof of x from A.
While it is not hard to apply Lemma 5.1 to prove I and II, it is substantially harder to verify that the
hypothesis

of II also

implies

that

there

exists

Aj

formulae

for representing

Prfjscay(x,y),

Prfis?1(a)(x,¥), Prfjs¥1(ay(x,y), etc. The Godel encodings for the latter Ay formulae is complex
because it employs fix point operators to represent self verification. It is difficult to briefly summarize Appendix A’s 16-page construction, but the proof of Lemma 5.4 (below) should explain at least
some of the intuition.

-19Lemma 5.4.

Let Prf25(x, ¥1, Y2) denote a Ag formula indicating y, is a semantic tableaux

proof of x from B, and y2 is a description of the successive states of a Turing Machine that verifies

y; is well defined.

Define IS2§(A) to be the analog of IS§(A) that uses the Ap formula

Prf2 js23(a)(X» Y1» Y2) in the place of Prfjssca)(x, y). Then for all nice A, there are Ap encodings for

Prf2ts2(ay(X+ Yi» Ya)» Prf2yso%¢ay(Xs Yi» Y2)s Prf2is2¥%1(ay(X, Yi, Y2), ete.
Quite Informal Proof Sketch.

imply that every r.e.

Kleene’s Fixed Point Theorem [Ke38] is known

axiom system A can be extended into a r.e.

[Ro67] to

system which formally asserts

(albeit often incorrectly) its own consistency. Rogers points out that this result holds for all the standard definitions of self-consistency (thus for inability to prove 0=1,
reflection, etc.).

, local reflection, 2, uniform

Since the variable y2 in Prf2(x, y;, y2) essentially simulates r.e.

computations,

Kleene’s Fixed Point Construction can be shown to imply that each of the axiom systems IS2(A),

IS2™(A), 182% ™*(A) etc. can be provided with formal r.e. encodings. Since Turing (x,y,z) can be
encoded as a Ap formula,

it then follows that each of Prf252(a)(X, y1, Y2), Prf2s2(ay(Xs Y1» Yo),

Prf2 15271(a)(X, ¥1, Y2), etc. have corresponding Ap definitions.

The preceding proof sketch was deliberately kept
to illustrate intuitively

Theorem.

how

the encoding

QED.

‘‘quite informal’’, and its only purpose was

of Prf2 js;a)(x,y)

is related to Kleene’s

Fixed

Point

In Appendix A, the discussion is both more rigorous and stronger (in that it applies to the

Prf rather than the

Prf2

formula).

We strongly recommend that the reader postpone examining

Appendix A’s formal Ap encoding of Prfjscq)(x, y) until after he has finished Section 6-14 because
Appendix A is tedious and distracts from the more important themes of Sections 6-14.

Moreover,

Appendix A is in some sense unnecessary because each theorem in Sections 6-14, about IS, retains
meaning,

even without Appendix A,

if Lemma 5.4’s slightly weaker IS2 formalism is used to

replace IS. That is, each theorem about IS can be translated into an analogous result about IS2 by

simply replacing y with the ordered pair (y1, y2)-

6. Proof of Proposition 1
In this section,

we will frequently refer to the subcomponents of a particular sentence. The

definition of this construct is slightly different from the notion of a “subformula”.
(X,Y)

which specifies X is a subcomponent

of Y to be the minimal relation satisfying the

following five constraints:
i) The formulae

X

and

ii) The formulae =X and

Y

will be subcomponents of
Y

Define a relation

X

VY and

will be subcomponents of X > Y;

X AY;

-20iii) For any parameter
of Va X(a) and
iv)

X

is

u

or constant c, the formulae X(u) and

will be subcomponents

for

the

Ja X(a);
a

subcomponent

of

——X;

_

other

(AXATY , “KVY)),

(aXVAY , (KAY),

(Wa-— X(a),

(3a

X(a),

and

Y

v) If X

X(c)

13a X(a)) , and

is a subcomponent of Y

miles

symbol

—

are

(XARY , (XY),

«Va X(a)).

is a subcomponent of Z, then

X

will also be a

subcomponent of Z.
Every semantic tableaux or resolution proof [Fi90,

Sm68] of

from an axiom system

A

must have every sentence of the proof tree (except possibly its root) constitute a subcomponent of
some axiom of A. This characteristic of semantic tableaux and resolution proofs will be called their
“cut-free" property.
calculus proof.

It is closely analogous to Gentzen’s notion [Ge69,Ta87] of a cut-free sequent

Whenever the subscript

d from IS¥(A,G) is omitted in this paper,

technically applies to semantic tableaux deduction,

our theorem

although it trivially generalizes to resolution,

as

well as any formal ‘‘cut-free’’ deduction method.
Let Prfiscay(L, y) denote the provability formula from Equation (2.2), which asserts that y is
a semantic tableaux proof of L.

Then Equation
= Vy

=

(6.1)

indicates that IS(A) is inconsistent:

Prfiscay(L,

y)

(6.1)

Lemma 6.1 The sentence (6.1) is not a subcomponent of any Group
Proof Sketch.

1 or 2 axiom of IS(A).

It is clear that (6.1) is not a subcomponent of any Group-1 axiom. The cannon-

ical form for Group-2 axioms appeared in (2.1), and it is rewritten below:

Pra( [] )>®

(2.1-rewritten)

Since the definition of Group-2 requires that ® be a II, sentence, it is clear that sentence (6.1) can
not be subcomponent of ®. Also,

the definition of Pra( [| ) implies that (6.1) can not possibly be

a subcomponent of — Pra( [@] ). QED
Lemma 6,2 ‘If the axiom system
IS(A)

A

is nice then a semantic tableaux proof

p of 1

from

is impossible without p formally constructing a parameter or constant element p’, such that

one node of p’s proof tree is the sentence —Prfiscay(1, p’)Proof

A proof of IS(A)’s inconsistency would consist of a tree whose axioms come from

IS(A) and whose branches are all closed.

Since

A

is nice,

the Group

1 and 2 axioms must be

-21-

certainly consistent with each other and valid under the standard model of the natural numbers.
Hence, an inconsistency proof

p

must use the Group

1 and 2 axioms to contradict the self-

consistency statement (2.2), which is rewritten below:

(2.2-rewritten)

Vy 7 Prfiscay(L, y)

But Lemma 6.1 showed assertion (6.1) was not a subcomponent of any of the Group-1 or Group-2
axioms!

Hence,

the necessary contradiction of (2.2) is technically possible only if the Group-1 and

Group-2 axioms contradict a subcomponent of (2.2) of the form —Prfjscay(L, p’),
ally contradict (2.2) directly.

rather than actu-

QED

We will now introduce some further notation that will simplify the main proof.

Rather than

use an‘m-ary function symbol f(x,,X2...Xm) to denote a function f, we will represent each function
with

(m+l)-ary

relation

symbol

A(x),X2,...Xm,W)

together

with

the

added

axiom

Vx, VXx2 ... WXm Sw: A¢(x] X2...Xm W)In this context, the semantic tableaux rule for eliminating an existential quantifier will replace
Saw ‘Y(w) with a sentence of the form ‘¥(u),

where

u is the symbol for a newly introduced parame-

ter. Similarly, the rule for eliminating the universal quantifier in Vw ®(w) will replace it with the
sentence @(k), where k represents here either one of the natural numbers 0137...

ter

u

,

OF a parame-

that was introduced during the elimination of an existential quantifier at a tree node position

which is an ancestor to the node specifying ®(u).
In the rest of this section,

we will assume that p denotes the minimal Godel number satisfying

Prfiscay(L, p), and we will derive a contradiction by showing that a smaller p* must also satisfy this
formula.

Let N denote a node in the proof tree p. Define ANCESTOR(N) to be the list of all the

sentences in the proof p that lie in the node N or one of its ancestors but which exclude from this
set any sentence.of the exact form (2.2) (i.e. excluded from ANCESTOR(N) is the Group-3 axiom
which formally asserts IS(A)’s self-consistency).
Say N is ancestor-consistent iff there exists an "interpretation" function, denoted as INT, that
assigns an integer value to each parameter symbol u;,

such that all IS(A)’s Group-1 and 2 axioms

and all the sentences in ANCESTOR(N) are valid (under the Standard Model)
are assigned their designated integer values under INT.

when the symbols u;

Call the node N maximal iff it is a node of

maximal depth in the proof tree p possessing some such interpretation function.

-22It is easy to apply the preceding definitions and lemmas to verify
1)

that a maximal node N has an unique child N*,

2)

that

N* stores a sentence of the form — Prfjscay(1, p’) (where p represents either a constant

or a parameter),
3)

that N* has no ancestor-consistent interpretation function (because N was maximal).

We will now derive a contradiction by showing that these three conditions force p’ to represent
another inconsistency proof which is strictly less than p.
Let mj), M2, m3... designate the integer constants and uj ,U2,U3 ...U; denote the parameter symbols appearing in the branch of p’s proof tree associated with N’s ancestors.

Let my,

denote the

largest of m,, M2, M3..... Then since the proof p consists of only logap bits and since more than j of
these bits are needed to represent uj U2 -** u;, it must follow that
Mmax <p 27

We will now calculate the value of INT(u;) for each

(6.2)

u;.

Without loss of generality,

let us also

assume that INT(u,)SINT(u2) SINT(u3) etc. We claim it must be true that

INT(u;) $ 2) + imax

(6.3)

The proof of (6.3) rests on the facts that Addition is IS(A)’s only increasing function and that
the existential quantifiers in the Group-2 axioms are nonincreasing (because of the requirement that
® in a Group-2 axiom be aI,

sentence).

tion defines a new parameter uj;4;

Hence,

Thus if u; is the largest constant before the addition func-

then it must be true that INT(uj,; ) S 2Max( INT(uj), Mmax)-

equation (6.3) follows because no more than j doublings are associated with uju2 --~- u;,

and the largest constant before these doublings occur is bounded by MmaxThe combination of (6.2) and (6.3) imply that INT(p*) must satisfy (6.4) (in both the cases
where p* represents a constant and a parameter).

INT(p") S MAX (INT(uj) , max ) <P-

(6.4)

But INT becomes inconsistent on the tree branch associated with N* at precisely the point where N*
introduces the sentence —Prfjsiay(L, p’). This implies that p’ must represent (under INT’s interpretation) an element smaller than p satisfying

Priiscay(L, p*)

(6.5)

This is the desired contradiction, since p was presumed to be the smallest inconsistency proof. QED

7. Proof of Proposition 2
Define a terse proof of Q to be a tree of sentences, partially analogous to a semantic tableaux

proof, satisfying the following two rules:
i)

Each

node in a terse proof will be either an axiom or a deduction from a higher node of the

proof tree. (This property is the same as its analog in semantic tableaux proofs except that the
root of {2's terse proof does not store the contradictory assumption
ii)

Terse proofs

will

of the proof tree be

not

=

).

be required to satisfy the semantic tableaux condition that all branches

‘‘closed’’

(by containing a pair of contradictory sentences). Instead, one

(and only one) branch will be allowed to be an exception to this rule. The exceptional branch
in Q’s terse proof will be called its pivotal branch, and its leaf will instead contain the sentence Positive(Q).

(This sentence was defined in section 5 as essentially the rewriting of the

sentence Q in positive normal form).

Terse proofs are a much weaker mode of deduction than semantic tableaux proofs because Part
(i) of their definition precluded performing proofs by contradiction. Their significance is easiest to
appreciate if one considers the example where t represents a terse proof of
a semantic tableaux proof of ®. Let Glue(t,p)
the sentence { 041}

+

and p represents

denote the proof tree whose rootis

{41}

(ie.

), which has the subtree t descend from the root, and which has the proof tree

tree p descend from the bottom of t’s

pivotal branch. It is easy to see that Glue(t,p) is a seman-

tic tableaux proof of L.
But since it is impossible for a consistent axiom system to have a semantic tableaux proof of

L,

it follows that no consistent axiom system can simultaneously

semantic tableaux proof of ®.
merely a meta-theorem:

have a terse proof of ~® and a

The non-trivial aspect of the italicized sentence is that it is not

Rather Lemma 7.1 will show that the axiom system

IS(PA+)

will have

sufficient power to formally prove an essentially self-reflexive form of this sentence!
While examining this chapter, the reader should bear in mind that our goal is to study semantic tableaux proofs (rather than the weaker terse proofs), and to formally prove Proposition 2. The
terse proofs in Lemma 7.1 will serve solely as a vehicle for analyzing the properties of semantic
tableaux proofs, and for proving Proposition 2 later in this chapter.
Lemma 7.1 If there exists a terse proof tree for .® employing the axioms from IS(PA+),
then IS(PA+)

can prove

that it will be unable to construct a semantic tableaux proof of ©.

-24Proof. The hypotheses of Lemma 7.1 indicates that there exists a constant
Godel number of —®’s

terse proof.

Let

must therefore also exist).

While IS(PA+)

k = 64°g° [41]

g representing the

denote a second constant

(which

can not recognize multiplication as a function,

it cer-

tainly can verify the scalar product kp = ptp+pt...tp

is a function. Thus it can prove

Vp ay { y=kp=64-[AL]-g:p }

(7.1)

Since the axiom system PA+ is stronger than Peano Arithmetic,

it can verify neither its con-

sistency

nor

the

“Wt Vp Vy if
y=64°

consistency

of IS(PA+).

However,

t is a terse proof of -®

[1] ‘trp

then

Jq<y

and

satisfying

p

PA+

is strong enough

is a semantic tableaux

Prfjscq)(L,q)’’.

(In particular,

to

verify

that

proof of ® and
any system

as

strong as Peano Arithmetic can prove that Glue(t,p) satisfies the properties required of q.)
Since the bold-face sentence is a Il, theorem of PA+,
theorem of IS(PA+).

Moreover,

since

IS(PA+)

the Group-2 axioms imply it is also a

can prove (7.1) for some g which is a terse proof,

it can also recognize that the preceding bold face statement implies
tableaux proof of ®

then

3q

satisfying Prfis@pas(,q)”.

the second statement in bold print,
implies

p is a semantic

Lastly, ISC@PA+) can recognize that

Hence,

IS(PA+)

can prove

(see the the next paragraph for an important clarifying comment).
2.

V pif

combined with the Group-3 axiom ‘*Vq—Prfis@as (1,q)”’,

‘‘V p 4Prfis@ay ( [o], p)’’.

Remark

‘‘

‘‘Vp—Prfis@as ( [>], p)”’

QED

In the preceding paragraph and often elsewhere in this paper, our proofs shall

apply a cut rule at the meta-theoretical level. That is, suppose it is known that a cut-free IS(PA+)
system

can prove the two statements

[Be56,Ge69,Sc56,Fi90,Sm68,Ta87],

a

IS(PA+)

and a>f.

Then

by the Cut Elimination Theorem

will also support a cut-free proof of B.

For the sake

of shortening many of the proofs in this paper, we will often omit constructing formally the cut-free
proofs of such theorems

: Instead, their theoretical existence will be established implicitly via the

Cut Elimination Theorem and the fact that proofs for ® and a>f

exist! Such meta-reasoning had

greatly simplified the proof of Lemma 7.1. In particular, if o% and B designate the two bold-face sentences in Lemma 7.1’s proof,
and

a>.

and

@

then our proof had directly implied only that IS(PA+) could prove a

Meta-Logic had then implictly implied that IS(PA+) could also prove B ! Also,

denote the sentences

Vq—Prfiggpayy(L,q)

and

Vp—Prfiscpas ( [D1, p), then the final

line of Lemma 7.1’s proof had used Meta-Logic and the fact that IS(@PA+) could prove
BAy > @ to conclude that IS(PA+) could also prove

if y

B, y and

@ itself. Meta-Logic will be used frequently

in the remainder of this paper to shorten and simplify the proofs of many of our theorems.

-25We will now use Lemma 7.1 to prove Proposition 2a. Consider first the case where ® is false.
Since it is a false Ag sentence,
2 illustrates how
that

—®

there must exist a constant c satisfying

must then have a terse proof from the system

c exists and that one of IS(PA+)’s

Prfpa, (ol
IS(PA+)

Group-2 axioms is the sentence

perty when ®

Figure

(because the facts

Pr pa, ( [+0]

leads to a natural construction of a terse proof). Hence by Lemma 7.1, IS(PA+)
there exists no proof of ©.

,c).

) > 49%)

can formally prove

This implies that ISCPA+) can formally verify ©’s local reflection pro-

is false. Proposition 2a is also valid when ® is true because every true Ap sentence is

automatically proveable (thereby implying IS(PA+) can trivially verify its reflection princible). QED
We will now use meta-logic (see Remark 2) and Lemmas 7.1 and 5.3 to prove Proposition 2b.
For simplicity,

assume the I, sentence has the form ‘Y = {Vx ®(x)}.

Y is refutable.

Then since —'¥ is 2, both PA+ and IS(PA+) can prove

(see footnote *). Since — |

is Ap,

Consider first the case where
— ©; for some integer k

we can again construct a terse proof of it. The new facet is that

we can now use Lemma 5.3 to map every proof q of Vx (x) onto a proof f;(q) of Dy, where fy is a
provable function under IS(PA+).

But Lemma 7.1 in the context of — ®;’s terse proof implies

IS(PA+) can prove it has no semantic tableaux proof of Dz. Hence since IS(PA+) can verify fg is a
function,

it must be able to confirm that there is no proof of Wx ®(x).

This shows IS(PA+) can ver-

ify the local reflection statement for Vx ®(x) when this sentence is refutable.

The proof for the reflection statement of Vx (x) is trivial in the alternate case where this sentence is verifiable.

Hence the reflection statement for Vx (x) is provable in IS(PA+) whenever this

sentence is decidable. QED
A similar methodology is used to prove Proposition 2c. Proposition 2a indicates that IS(PA+)
can prove (7.2) when ®; is a Ap sentence and i is fixed.

(Ay Prfiseasy ([%], y)} >,

(7.2)

Also Lemma 5.3 indicates that IS(PA+) can certainly prove

{3x Prfispasy (FWv(v) 1, x)} > (By Prfispasy (TO, y)}
Since IS(PA+) can prove (7.2) & (7.3), it must be able to prove also (7.4),

of the Cut Elimination Theorem

(7.3)

by the transitive version

(defined below).

{3x Prfispasy ([Vv@(v)], x)} > O;

QED

(7.4)

Definition. The transitive version of the Cut Elimiation Theorem is used often in this paper. It
indicates that if IS(PA+) can prove Y>@

and

@2DH,

then it can also prove YO.

* Prom ZF set theory, one can infer that such a k must exist because Proposition 1 implies that the standard model for
the Natural Numbers is a model for IS(PA+).

-26-

8. Proof of Proposition 3
In the proof of Proposition 3, the lower case symbols
may be either a proof-parameter or a constant.

q, r, and

s_

represent.elements that

By a ‘‘constant’’ in a proof, we mean any one of

Section 5’s three possible representations of a constant,

i.e.

one of Chi] or either of an oti] or fi]

appearing within the range of a u#[i,j] or v#[i, j] form.
Throughout this section,

p denotes a proof of a Z; sentence,

by induction that all p satisfy

denoted as ‘¥. We will prove

Proposition 3’s strong-uniform 2; reflection principle.

The proof’s

overall structure will be similar to that of Proposition 1, although it will be a bit more elaborate.
For some Ap formula B(x), x2

***

Xz),

let us assume that (8.1) denotes VY.

W = (3x; dx, --+ Sx, : Bx; , x2 *** XL)}

(8.1)

Define the I], normalized ciakradicdon of ‘¥ to be the I, formula
Wx; Vxp

-+* Vxp : a B(x, x2

For any set of parameters or constants s;, $2, ***

°°

Xz)

(8.2)

Sz, define the corresponding sharp contradiction

of ‘¥ to be any formula of the form:

— B(s;, Sz *** Sz)
Define an intermediate contradiction of

(8.3)

to be either its II;-normalized contradiction or a formula

of one of the L-1 forms
Vx2 Wx3 Vx4
Vx3 Vxq4

°'*
‘°°

Vx_

Wxz_
: 4B(S], X2 X3 °°*
Wx : -B(s; S2,X3

: —B(s;, 52, °**

Xz)

*** XL)

St-1,XL)

(8.4)

The strong-uniform 2, reflection principle for Is” (A) was defined in Section 3 to be the
statement that all 2; formulae D, satisfy

Vv Vy {Prfistay([®)1,y) > 3}
For any pair of parameters or constants

(8.5)

r and q, define a primary and secondary deduction from

the strong-uniform reflection axiom (8.5) to be a sentence similar to (8.6) and (8.7) respectively.

Vy {Prfjs2a)(1®,1,y) > 2}

(8.6)

(oddball

-27Prf istay([®,1,q) > 9
Our proof of Proposition
INT from section 6.

3 will employ

some very close analogs

of ANCESTOR(N)

ANCESTOR*(N)

be

For our current discussion,

all the sentences in the proof p that lie in either the node
excluded are all the Group-3 axioms,
tions of ‘¥.

(8.7)

will

defined as

and

the list of

N

or one of its ancestors, except that

their primary deductions,

and all the intermediate contradic-

(Sharp contradictions of ‘¥ and secondary deductions from Group-3 axioms are permit-

ted in ANCESTOR(N).) Once again, let us say N is ancestor-consistent iff there exists an "interpretation" function,

denoted as INT*,

that assigns an integer value to each parameter symbol Ofi] such

that all IS” (A)’s Group-1 and 2 axioms and all the sentences in ANCESTOR(N)

the Standard Model)
Again, N

are valid

(under

when the symbols Ofi) are assigned their designated integer values under INT*.

is called maximal if it is a node of maximal depth in the proof tree p possessing some

such interpretation function.
Let N denote a maximal node
only one child, and
similar,

N*

and let N*

denote N’s child. In Section 6, N could have

stored a sentence of the form — Prfjgca)(L, q).

and the carefully chosen definition of ANCESTOR*,

Our present application is

in this case,

forces

N*

to store

either a sharp contradiction of ‘¥ or a secondary deduction from a Group-3

axiom,

(i.e.

one of

Equations (8.3) or (8.7)).

We are now ready
and

let N

and

N*

to prove

beas

defined

Proposition
above.

3. Let p be an arbitary proof of a 2,

Since N*

must

store

a sentence of the form

theorem,
(8.3)

or

(8.7), we need merely to check that the proof p satisfies the strong-uniform 2, reflection property
for the two cases below:
Proof

when

B(INT’(s;), INT’(s2),

p’s

node

°°:

N*

contains

a

sharp

contradiction

of

‘Y:

In

this

INT*(s,)) must be true because otherwise — B(s,, so,

***

S_) would

not provide the contradiction of INT* (which by definition is associated with N*).
Addition is the only increasing function available in the proof
INT’(s;)<p

p,

case

Moreover since

it must be true that

each

(for the same reasons that the similar bound appeared in the proof of Proposition 1).

Hence, each of the s; are small enough for the strong-uniform 2, reflection principle to be valid for
the proof p. QED
Proof for the

‘‘“ALTERNATE”’

tion of a Group-3 axiom:

case where

p’s

node

N* contains a secondary deduc-

To prove strong-uniform 2, reflection for this case,

show that it is impossible for this case to occur.

it is sufficient to

d

- 28 Our proof will begin by inductively assuming that all Godel numbers i < p

satisfy strong-

uniform x reflection.

[f the sentence appearing in N* was Equation (8.7)’s secondary deduction,

then Prfjst;ay( [Dnt

| ,INT’q))

> o AE

contradicts the sentence Prfjst1(a)( [o, ] 4)

would be false (because the interpretation INT*

> ®}

in this case ). Once again,

rate of the Addition function implies that INT°(q) <p.

Thus,

the slow growth

some integer i < p must violate the

strong-uniform , reflection principle. The preceding statement contradicts the inductive hypothesis,
and hence shows this

‘‘alternate’’ case can not occur. QED

Remark 3. Define a GZ, formula to be a wif 2 = ( Qy xy Qo x2 *** Qi xj : O(a, x2 °** X)}

where each Q; is either an existential quantifier or a bounded universal quantifier, and where © is
Ao formula.

Proposition 3 can be strengthened to indicate the consistency of a system is™ (A),

whose Group-3 axioms indicate that the strong uniform Z, reflection princible holds for all GZ, formulae

(see footnote *)
Remark 4. Propositions 1 & 3 hold both when the language of Is™ (A) uses an m-ary function

symbol

f(x;,X2...Xm) to denote a function,

and when it is represented

symbol Af(x),X2,--.Xm,W) together with the added axiom
(Only for the sake of simplifying the proof notation,

by an (m+l)-ary relation

Wx, Wx2 ... WXm Sw: A¢(x, X2...Xm W).

Section 6 had assumed the latter during its

growth analysis in Equations (6.2) thru (6.4).)

9. Proof of Proposition 4 and a Discussion of its Generalizations
The proof of Proposition 4 is quite simple.

Lemma 5.3 implies that Is™ (PA+) can prove (9.1)

for any fixed i.

(3x Prfist pax ([Vvo(v)], x)} > (Ay Prisha (Ijl, y))
Also Is” (PA+)’s

, reflection property implies that it can verify (9.2) when

©; is &).

(9.2)

{By Prfistpay (1, y)} >
Since IS™ (PA+) can prove (9.1) & (9.2) (for any ®

(9.1)

which is ~,), the Cut Elimination Theorem

implies Is” (PA+) can also prove (9.3).

{3x Prfist¢pas (TVv(v)1, x)} 3%

QED

* The formal proof of the footnoted statement requires some tedious notation, but it is easy to explain the intuition
behind it. It intuitively follows from the fact that every GY, formula 2 can be mapped onto a
1 formula Q

such that £2 = QQ”

under the natural interpretation of bounded quantifiers.

(9.3)

-29The perhaps most interesting facet of Proposition 4 and the proof above is that they can be generalized significantly.

Let ‘¥ denote an arbitrary I12, sentence of the canonical form (9.4), where ©

below is a Ag formula.
W = (Vx, Sy, Vx2 Fy2 «. WXq A¥n : O(Xy X2---Xn Y1¥2--Yn)}
Let I = (C;,C2...cp)
the Z,

formula

denote an arbitrary n-tuple of integer constants.

{ Sy; Ay2...dy, : O(c;c2...cnyiY2--¥n)}

required to satisfy the constraint y; <p-Max(c;,C2...cj).
I,]y...Im,

define its E-Tree,

denoted as Treey(p,

(9.4)

Define Branchy(p, 1) to be

with the added caveat that each y; is
Given

a set of

m

distinct n-tuples

11,I2...Im), to be the Ag formula which asserts that

the conjunction of the formulae Branchy(p, I,), Branchy(p, I,)...Branchy(p,I,,) is true,

tionally if each of the first k constants in
values in Branchy(p,

];) and Branchy(p,

An axiom system

B’s_

and addi-

1; and Jj are identical then the first k of the y,y2---Yr
Jj) are required to be matching.

E-Tree Reflection Principle for ‘Y and (1),],...1,,) is the sentence:

(9.5)

Vp {Prig(I¥1,p) > Treey(p, TisIo---Im) }
Also,

its Bounded E-Tree Reflection Principle for Y , (1j,])...l,)

and a fixed exponent A is the

assertion:

Vp {(( 4 x=p*) A Prfg(I¥1 ,p)] > Treey(, Li,b.Im) }
In [Wi94],

(9.6)

we generalize the techniques of Sections 7 & 8 to prove:

Proposition 8.

For each nice system

A,

there exists an introspective system ISE™®(A),

which is consistent and whose Group-3 axioms are strong enough to verify its E-Tree Reflection

Principle for every Y and (1),]2.--Im)The proof of Proposition 8 has been postponed until [Wi94] because of its length.

is possible to sketch a short proof for Proposition 9 below

However,

it

(which is only slightly weaker than Pro-

position 8),
Proposition 9.

Let

A

denote either the axiom system

PA+,

or any extension of it. Then

the system Is (A) can prove the validity of its Bounded E-Tree Reflection Principle for every

‘¥

and (I;,I5...I,,) with =m _ in Equation (9.6).
Very Informal Proof Sketch. Employing an analog of Lemma 5.3’s proof, the system
associate a fixed constant

K with each fixed tuple (1,12...1,), such that if p is a proof of

there exists q<K-p™

, 11,]g..Im).

which is a proof of Treey(

can be encoded as a I; sentence,

As before,

implying that the Group-2 axioms

A can
then

the preceding remark

will cause it to be a theorem

-30-

of IS™ (A). Since Is™ (A) recognizes scalar multiplication as a function, it can thus prove:

Vp Vx {[x=p™APrfishay(P¥1 ,p)] > 3q Prfist(ay([Treey
(ce, I) ,1p-.[m)].4)}

(9.7)

Moreover, IS”"(A) ’s strong-uniform =, reflection axioms indicate that
(9.8)

ay([Treep (eo, 11,]2.Im)I , q) > Treey(e, 1).]2---Im)

3q Preis

Hence, IS™ (A) can prove (9.6) with A=m,

by the Cut Elimination Theorem and the fact that Is" (A)

can prove (9.7) & (9.8). (A more detailed justification of Propositions 8 & 9 appears in [Wi94].)

10. Philosophical Implications of Propositions 2c, 4, 8 and 9
The significance of Propositions 2c,

4,

8 and 9 is perhaps not quite self-evident.

these reflection principles provide some form of information not available in classical logics,
Lob’s Theorem
principles,

Clearly
since

[Me87] states that traditional axiom systems are unable to prove their reflection

except in the trivial case where the right side of the implicant is also provable.

On the

other hand, since every Ag sentence is decidable from merely the Group 1 axioms and since all valid
2, sentences are provable from Group 1, these reflection principles have only limited implications in
extending what one is capable of learning.
proofs for each ®,, ®2, @3
tence Vv P(v)

---.

Their main significance lies in unifying the seperate

For instance by Proposition

4, a single proof for the II, sen-

is kiown INTERNALLY by introspective systems to have a reflection power com-

parable to more expensive separate proofs for each of its 2, instances

, ©., PB; --- . (The E-

trees in Proposition 8 & 9 generalize this effect.)
The most surprising facet of Propositions 2c, 4, 8 and 9 will be their stark contrast with Proposition 5 (whose proof appears in the next section). Proposition 5 asserts that the local reflection
sentences for certain II; sentences Vv D(v)
positions 2c,

can not be presumed by an IS-like system,

4,

8 &

9 show that the analogous

“semi-uniform"

instance set Dy

, Dz,

D3°°*

(!!!) automatically follow.

does nevertheless

while Pro-

reflection principle for its Ap

One way to appreciate philosophically Propositions 2c, 4, 8 and 9 is to view man as living a
quite mundane bounded life, where he is technically able to recognize and perceive the truth of only
very tangible Ag sentences.

In a sense (formalized by Proposition 5),

even the simplest form of

infinite sentences (of the Il, type) are beyond the human’s horizon for comprehension.
proof of a Il, theorem,

However, the

unlike its formal statement, appears to be technically (!!!) within man’s

intellectual grasp because it helps to more orderly organize the world of Ag knowledge (in a sense
formalized by Propositions 2c, 4, 8 and 9),

se

<4] «
11. Proof of Proposition 5
In this section,
is either

PA+

the keyword INVALID.1 will designate the axiom system si ™ (A), where A

or an extension of it. (A second variant of ‘‘invalid axioms system’’ will be dis-

cussed in Section 12.) This section will prove INVALID.]1 is inconsistent by applying Godel’s paradigm to essentially the sentence asserting ‘‘Every proof x from the axiom system INVALID.1 fails
to verify this sentence’. The combination of the fact that this sentence can be encoded as a I, statement and the I], Local Reflection Principle will be used to prove INVALID.1 must be inconsistent.
Define SUBST(a,b) to be the classic Aj formula expressing that if a is the Godel number of
@(x) then SUBST(a,b)

is satisfied only by that

obtained by replacing

x with the constant

b

which is the Godel number of the sentence

a (see *). The italicized sentence from the previous

paragraph can be formally represented by taking ® from (11.1) and forming the sentence © ([@]).
® = {Vx2 Vx3 [SUBST (x), x2) >

Prfinvaup.1 (X2, X3)]}

(11.1)

Let H denote the special integer satisfying

SUBST (I ], H).

(11.2)

INVALID.1 can obviously prove that ® ([@]) is equivalent to (11.3).
Y=

{ Vx Prfinvaup. CH, x) }

(11.3)

A semantic tableaux proof of ‘Y appears in Figure 3. Let q denote this proof, and Tr denote

INVALID.1’s proof that Y is equivalent to ®([@]).
and fr as fixed constants,

it must be able to recognize a third Godel number p,

proof of D( [®]).

(To be precise,

existence of q and

fT by the Meta-Logic,

POINT

Since INVALID.1 can recognize both q

the existence of p

corresponding to a

is an immediate consequence of the

described in Remark 2 of Section 7).

THE

MAIN

IS that D( []) asserts it has no such proof p ! This implies INVALID.1 is inconsistent.

Or if one wishes to be strictly formal, the precise paradox is that:
Since Pp isa fixed constant, representing a proof of D( [@1), there is a formal proof in INVALID.1
of the theorem statement that p is a proof of ®([@]). This latter theorem formally contradicts
D( [o] ), which is another theorem of INVALID.1 ! Hence, INVALID.1 is inconsistent.

* While essentially all interesting introspective axiom systems are too weak to prove D is functionally determined by
@ under the SUBST(a,b) relation, they nevertheless have no difficulty in expressing SUBST(a,b) as a Ao formula.
The formal encoding of SUBST follows from the combination of Lemma 5.1. and Theorem A.1 (from Appendix A).

ABs

Pew sta

my
12. Justification
Let

the

of Proposition 6.

keyword

INVALID.2

be

an

abbreviation

for

Proposition

6’s

axiom

system

1s” “(PA+ , G,,). The following lemma will help us prove INVALID.2’s inconsistency.
Lemma 12.1.

All of INVALID.2’s local reflection statements for TI, sentences are theorems

of this axiom system.
Proof Sketch: For each

A%>0

Ag

formula

‘P(v) with only

such that PA+ can prove (12.1) as a theorem.

v_

free,

there exists some constant

(One needs to merely apply Lemma 5.3’s T-

transformation to verify this fact.)

VaVbWeld<c : {¢ =(ab)* A Prfinvaup2(I¥v¥(v)1, a)} > Prfinvauip2(1, d)
Since (12.1) is a Tl, theorem of PA+,
theorem of INVALID.2.

the class of Group-2 axioms imply that it will also be a

Since INVALID.2 recognizes multiplication as a total function, another

theorem of it will clearly be {VaVbac c = (ab)*}. These two facts
Meta-Logic)

Moreover,

(12.1)

(via another application of

imply that (12.2) must also be a formal theorem of INVALID.2.

VaWb3d: Prfpwvaup2(lVvY(v)I, a) > Prfyvauip2(l%1.4)

(12.2)

the proof of ‘¥,, is known within INVALID.2 to imply ‘Y,’s validity

(in the ‘‘uniform’’

sense), by INVALID.2’s

U Ag reflection property. Thus, it can verify

VbVd: Prfmvaup2(l¥51,d) > Yb)
Since INVALID.2 can prove (12.2) & (12.3),

the Cut Elimination Theorem, via

(12.3)
Remark 2’s per-

spective (from page 22), implies it can also prove (12.4):
Va:

Since ‘Y is an arbitrary Ay
its local IT,

Prfijvaup 2(Vv¥(v)] »a) > Vv ‘Y(v).

(12.4)

formula, the preceding argument shows that INVALID.2 can prove all

reflection statements. QED

The main part of the proof of Proposition 6 is nearly the same as Proposition 5’s proof. This is
because Proposition 5 implied that any introspective system which includes the LIT,
axioms is automatically inconsistent,

reflection

and Lerhma 12.1 indicated that the LTT, reflection statements

are indeed theorems of INVALID.2.
The previous paragraph contained the phrase ‘‘nearly the same proof’’ because one remaining
difference between Propositions 5 & 6 is that INVALID.I treats LIT, reflection as an axiom schema,
whereas Lemma 12,1 only established the LITT,

reflection sentences as theorems of INVALID.2.

-33-

This fact implies that the precise semantic tableaux in Figure 3 is not helpful for proving Proposition
6 because the third line in Figure 3’s tableaux is technically permissible only when LT], reflection is
an axiom.
& 6:

This detail is mostly a technical rather than conceptual distinction between Propositions 5

Appendix B explains formally how after one minor modification the exact formalism from

Chapter 11 can be extended to also prove Proposition 6.

13. Proof of Proposition 7 and Added Remarks.
Define a tableaux proof with cuts to be a deduction formalism identical to semantic tableaux,

except that it is permissible to include the sentence © V 4,
proof tree.

for any sentence ®, in any node of a

Although this section proves Proposition 7 formally for tableaus with cuts,

its proof

trivially generalizes to all the other usual deduction methods allowing cuts.
In our proof, ‘¥ will denote IS,(A,G_)’s

Model(k)

indicated below.

(13.1)

}

{ Vx 3Prfisa,c)(1,x)

Y=
Let

Group-3 axiom sentence,

denote the finite model generated by the first k+1 natural numbers 0,1,2,...k

the functions and relations of the axiom group

G_.

under

(This definition is reasonable because all the

functions f of G_ satisfy f(xy ,X2,-.,Xn) S Max(x1,X2,--:%n).) Let GE be a set of
Group-1

axioms

0,1,2 -++ Kk,
Since

identical

G_,

except

that

G*

Also let Schema(k) denote the union of

Schema(k)

is valid under

some integer k such that
assuming,

to

Model(k),

discusses
G¥

only

the

first

with IS,(A, G_)’s

k+l

constants

Group-2 axioms.

IS,(A, G_)

can be inconsistent only if there exists

‘VY is invalid under Model(k).

We will prove that this can not occur by

for the sake of contradiction,

that

n

is the minimal integer where

—‘Y

is valid under

Model(n).

This assumption implies that there exists some

tSn

in Model(n)

such that t

satisfies

(13.2)

Prfis,ca,c.)(L,t)
Let

m

denote the largest constant appearing in the proof

have the same definitions as Schema(k)

and

Model(k).

t,

and let

Schema(m)

By definition,

‘PV

axiom which may appear in the proof t and which is not in Schema(m).
Schema(m)
imply that ‘Y

t.

are

valid under

is invalid

under

Model(m),
Model(m).

the combination
Clearly

m

of

(13.2)

is less than

Model(m)

is the only possible

Since all the axioms of

and the previous sentence

t, since it appears in the proof

The last two sentences provide the desired contradiction because

presumed to be the least integer such that —‘Y

and

is valid under Model(n).

m<tSn,
QED

and

n

was

-34Remark 5. Some hybrid versions of Proposition 7 that follow from the techniques of Sections

8-11 are that IS2"(A, G_), ISU™(A, G_), ISk™(A, G_), ISU (A, G_), etc. are consistent
for all nice A, and that once again the same is false for Isk my (A, G_).
Remark 6. For simplicity,

this paper has employed the definition of Go, introduced in Sec-

tion 2. Its definition was quite arbitrary,
definitions.

For instance,

fii] (x, »X25-0Xj)

and our main theorems trivially extend for more general

say the function symbol

S i2J - Max (X1,X25-+-%j)-

of slowly growing functions is added to Gg,

fii]

(from Section 5) is slowly growing iff

Propositions 1-4 and 8 & 9 will hold when any set

and Propostion 7 is valid when any set of non-growth

functions is added to G_.
Remark 7. Let R denote any recursively enumerable axiom system that uses the language sym-

bols of IS and which is consistent with Gg.
such that
Go

@

Clearly, there will then exist a Ap formula Deriv(x,y)

is a theorem of R if and only if Jy Deriv ([o], y). Define Ap to be the union of

with the added axiom schema of the form

Vy { Deriv([], y) > ®}

(13.3)

The system

Ag is obviously nice, and Propositions 1, 3 & 7 will consequently imply that IS( Ap ),

Is™ (Ag),

and IS,(Ap,G_)

are consistent systems that prove all the Tl, theorems of R.

14. Philosophical Speculations
This article has sought to determine how
Theorem,

powerful,

in light of Godel’s Incompleteness

can self-verifying systems become? Propositions 1-4 and 7-9 have illustrated the limited

but tangible power of self-verifying formalisms,
the inconsistency of both

IS,(PA+)

and

while Propositions

IS,(PA+,G,)

5 & 6 and Solovay’s proof of

have formalized several restrictions on

these systems.
Propositions 1 & 7 clarify the meaning of Solovay’s version of the Incompleteness Theorem by
showing that the inconsistent systems

IS,(PA+,G,)

and ISj(PA+, Gg)

become consistent when

one either excludes Gentzen-style cuts or removes the successor function from the Group-1 formalism of G,.
Our research was motivated,

in part,

by the perspective that humans must (in some weak

sense ? ) presume their own consistency to justify the mental energy expended during cogitation.
The CFA system of Kreisel and Takeuti [KT74] differs from our approach by being a self-verifying
second order system.

It also warrants the reader’s close attention.

-35It is difficult to list crisp philosophical conclusions that follow from the theorems of this paper
because many of our self-verifying formalisms become inconsistent when their underlying definitions
are changed only slightly.

A possible explanation for the sharp contrast between Proposition 5’s

invalid T1, local reflection principle and the quite valid close approximations to it in Propositions 2c,
4, 8 and9

was given in Section 10.

me noted, there are valid epistemological perspectives,

where

a proof of a II, theorem should be viewed exclusively as a proof, rather than also as a theorem!
It should be mentioned that all our formalisms in Propositions 1-4 and 8 & 9 remain consistent
in the presence of Gentzen-style cuts,
(see *). Thus,

in the degenerate case where the sentence being cut is Ap

Solovay’s Theorem about the inconsistency of IS,(PA+)

deduction rule to sentences with unbounded quantifiers.

rests on applying the cut

Also the passage containing Equation (3.7)

described types of Ao cut princibles such that these cut princibles are valid for introspective IS-like
systems but invalid for classical axiom systems.
One interesting question concerns the relationship between Zermelo-Fraenkel Set Theory (ZF)
and the axiom system IS(ZF). While ZF set theory can not prove its own consistency [Go31],

proofs within this paper can be carried out within ZF.

all the

This is a bit interesting because it means ZF

can prove its consistency is equivalent to an alternate system IS(ZF), which is self-verifying and

affirms the consistency of ZF.

(Indeed,

IS(ZF) confirms ZF’s Il, validity.) This raises the philo-

sophical question of whether when humans think they are using an analog of ZF for reasoning,

they

may be actually relying unconsciously upon some variant of a more introspective IS(ZF) (or perhaps

upon IS"(ZF), IS“ (ZF), 18° ™(ZF) or ISY (ZF) etc.).
To some extent, Logic appears to be analogous to Physics, where neither the wave nor particle
theory convey the full truth, and individual axiomatic frameworks can convey only partial perspectives.

In a similar spirit,

it is awkward to both use a self-verifying system (because of its weak

structure), or to employ a non-self-verifying systems (because it does not explain how humans justify the mental energy expended during cogitation without implicitly presuming their consistency).
Some hybrid perspective where one can readily shift perspectives,

as in the example of Physics,

perhaps needed.

ZF and IS(ZF),

In this regard, we note that the pair of systems,

do allow one to

* One way to formally extend IS(A) to include Ap cutting is to simply add to IS(A) an axiom DV 4@ for
each Ap sentence @ (and verify that all our Propositions remain valid under such a modification). However, this is
essentially unnecessary because

IS(A), without modification,

tence Prfy([DViAd|)

> OVA.

crease in proof

length. This_pice property holds because if

can simulate a Ag

is

cut rule with only a polynomial in-

is Ap then IS(A)'s Group-2 axioms include the sen-

- 36-

readily shift perspectives in that:
i)

ZF is strong, and it can comprehend
that ZF

ii)

(through its own internalized version of Model Theory)

is consistent if and only if IS(ZF) is consistent.

IS(ZF) is self-verifying and clearly able to employ ZF at the level of comprehending

ZF’s

MT,

theorems.

Thus,

the pair of systems, ZF and IS(ZF),

has both a strong and self-verifying component, with

each component understanding quite well the significance of the other

!!!

(Curiously,

the ZF half

of this 2-part system can be viewed as performing deduction with Gentzen-style cuts, if ZF is defined
to include the axiom

©®V—-—®

for each sentence ®.

On the other hand by the combination of

Solovay’s negative and Proposition 7’s positive result, the IS(ZF) fragment of this system can not
consistently employ deduction with Gentzen cuts, unless all growth functions, including Successor,
are removed from IS(ZF)’s Group-1 axioms ! )

The results of this paper are likely to also have some significance even if one subscribes to the
philosophical position that human thought is too complicated to be encaptured by any single
pair)

of r.e. axiom systems.

For example,

consider an axiom system

A

taking the union of a countable class of transcending axiom systems Ay
where each A; but not A

is r.e.

(or

which is constructed by

C Az

C A3

C

-:--

There was insufficient space to explore such structures in this

paper, but Propositions 1 thru 9 clearly have some implications for them,

since they define respects

in which the sub-components A, can be required to be self-verifying.
Finally,
rather than

it should be noted that the title of this chapter was
‘‘Concluding Remarks’’.

‘‘Philosophical Speculations’’

The former title was selected because it is difficult to list crisp

philosophical conclusions following from our theorems when many of the self-verifying formalisms
become inconsistent after their underlying definitions are changed only slightly.
Thus,

the most important conclusion of this paper may be merely that several provably correct

self-verifying axiom systems become inconsistent when their underlying definitions are changed only

slightly.
Acknowledgments: I warmly thank the University of Tel Aviv for hosting my sabbatical in
1992 while this paper was conceived.

As a child of two parents who barely survived the Holocaust,

I was especially glad to spend my sabbatical in Israel. I also thank Sam Buss and Robert Solovay
for their suggestions on how to improve the presentation.

I thank the Computer Science Department

of the University at Albany for providing me with the extra time needed to write up this draft.

-37-

APPENDIX

A

This appendix will show that for each nice A, it is possible to encode Prfjsay (x,y) as a Ap formula.

For simplicity,

our discussion will focus exclusively on the IS(A) system from Propositions 1

& 2.

An easy generalization will imply that for any G2Go,

it is also possible to provide the

IS§(A, G) systems in Proposition 3 thru 9 with a Ap formula for encoding Prfiss (a,c) (x,y).

We will often employ the following notation.
i)
ii)

| UNION(A) designates the union of IS(A)’s Group-1 and Group-2 axioms.
ExPrfg (x,y,z)

designates the formula that y is a semantic tableaux proof of

x

using the

axiom system B plus the added axiom whose Godel number equals z.
iii)

SUBST;

(x,y) denotes Godel’s classic substitution relation which yields TRUE when

Godel number of a formula that contains a free variable

formula generated by replacing each appearance of
where

fi] »

y

is not the Godel

number

of a formula,

is a

is the Godel number of a

«Mi ”” with the Godel number

Si] is always free in x and it has at least one such appearance.

define SUBST ; (x,0) to be TRUE when x

x

x, and

(It is convenient to

fails one of the preceding conditions,

i.e. when

it does not contain an appearance of fi],

x

or some

appearance of ¥[i] is not free.)
Our notation will imply that if H is the Godel number of the sentence specifying IS(A)’s Group-3
axiom then

ExPrfyyion(ay (X,y,H)

essentially formalizes

Prfjsca)(x,y).

The relation

SUBST

will

be employed to define formally the integer H, as will be shown in Equations (A.2) & (A.3).
Point of Clarification. Since it does not recognize multiplications as a function, IS(A) will
clearly be too weak to prove that

Vx dy SUBST ; (x,y).

However, IS(A) will be able to prove for

any fixed integer k that 3y SUBST; (k, y). It will turn out that the latter will be sufficient for IS(A)
to formally define the particular instance of the reflection principle needed-to define H.

Theorem A.1. Recall that the class of majorized formulae were defined in Lemma 5.1. This
class is broad enough so that:
a)

SUBST;

(x,y) can be encoded by a majorized formula;

b)

the three statements that a Godel number
axiom systems of PA, PA+,

c)

or

ZF

x is an axiom belonging to one of the conventional

can be encoded as majorized formulae;

for any axiom system B which can be encoded by a majorized formula, the expression
Prfg (x,y) can also be encoded as a majorized formula;

d)

forany nice A, the expression ExPrfynioncay (%,y.Z) (and hence also Prfynionca) (x,y) ) can
be encoded as majorized formulae.

~ 38 Before proving Theorem A.1, its significance should be explained. The combination of Lemma
5.1 and Theorem A.1 imply that SUBST; (x,y),
be encoded as Ag formulae.

Prfunioncay (x.y)

This implies that Equation

Notation in Equation
omit Section 5’s

9

(A.1).

symbol.

ExPrfynioncay (%Y.Z) can

(A.1) can be encoded as a I, formula.

Our notation has been informal in this article, and we usually
For instance,

technically be written as ty]
cit meaning is clear.

and

and

the symbols

y

and

z in Equation (A.1) should

¢[z), but we omit the tiresome notation because their impli-

One exception to this rule is that the formal symbol

$fi]

is employed in

Equation (A.1) because otherwise it is not evident that the designated variable has the same index
as the SUBST ; relation. Essentially, this is the only exception appearing in this article.

Vy

—{ Prfunionay (L,y)

VY [3z<y

SUBST; (¥f[i], z) A ExPrfunioncay (L.y,z)]}

Let

J denote the Godel number of Equation (A.1).

(A-1)

This Godel number will enable us to formally

define the construct Prfjsca)(x,y), which was employed but not given a formal definition in Sections
2 thru 7.

Equation (A.3) is the formal definition of Prfjsca)(x,y),

ing Group-3 axiom

(of the generic form

"Wy — Prfiscay(1,y)" ). (These equations enable us to

formalize Prfjsca) (x;y) because the only integer
& (A.3)

is (A.2)’s

Godel number.)

Equation

(A.2) is a I];

sentence,

Since

and

and (A.2) is IS(A)’s correspond-

z satisfying

SUBST,

(A.3)

Prf and

is a Ag

SUBST; (J,z)
ExPrf

formula.

in equations

can be given

Ap

(A.2)

definitions,

These definitions of provability

and of IS(A)’s Group-3 axiom will thus meet the requirements of the closing paragraph in Section 5.

Vy

— ( Prfunionay (L.y)

V

[A z<y SUBST;(J, z) A ExPrfunionca) (1.y.2)]}

Prfymion(a) (X,Y)

Vo

{3z<y

SUBST

;(J, z) A ExPrfynioncay (X, ¥,Z)

(A.2)

}

(A.3)

Clarifying Comment 1. Equation (A.3) appears to be the simplest possible representation of
Prfiscay(X,y) as a Ap formula.
number satisfying
system

UNION(A).

The reason is easiest to appreciate if K

SUBST;(J,K).
Then

Let

y<K_

denotes the unique Godel

encode a proof of the sentence

y will not satisfy the curly bracket expression in Equation (A.3),

the formula Prfyyionay (x, y) in Equation (A.3) is necessary to indicate that
from the axiom system

x from the axiom

IS(A).

On the other hand,

axiom will have a Godel number greater than

K.

any proof

Thus,

y

y

and

is a valid proof

that includes IS(A)’s Group-3

the curly bracket expression in Equation

(A.3) is sufficient to test for whether y is this second type of proof of x.

-39-

Clarifying Comment 2. The preceding discussion has shown how the combination of Parts
(a) & (d) of Theorem A.1 enables us to construct a Ap definition for Prfisca)(x,y).
Parts (b) or (c) of Theorem A.1,

Lemma 5.1,

Part (b)

and their significance’should now be explained.

implies that the axiom systems

PA,

PA+

and

Thus, these axiom systems meet the requirements for Propositions
IS(PA), IS(PA+) and IS(ZF).

It did not employ

ZF

Combined with

have Ag definitions..

1 thru 9 to be applicable to

The combination of Lemma 5.1 and Part (c) of Theorem A.1 imply

that for each nice axiom system A, Prf,(x,y) can be encoded as a Ag formula.

This fact is impor-

tant because it justifies our presumption that all IS(A)’s Group-2 axioms can be encoded as II; sentences (i.e., it justifies the sentence which had followed Equation (2.1) ).
The remainder of this Appendix will be devoted to proving Theorem A.1’s four claims.

As is

often the case with the construction of Godel encodings, the formal details of the proofs are quite
tedious.

These details are included only for the sake of completeness.

The main theorems of Sec-

tions 3-14 are clearly of greater conceptual interest. It is strongly recommended that they be examined before the remainder of this Appendix.

(Indeed, since Section 5 showed Prf2 (x,y,z) can be

trivially encoded with a Ag definition, readers not caring about the technical distinction between Prf

and Prf2 can reasonably choose to omit the entire remainder of this Appendix.)
Recall that a byte is defined in this paper as an unit consisting of six bits.
function of
strings).

Gg, listed in Section 2,

manipulated essentially binary encodings of integers

Since this Appendix will be studying mostly byte strings

be convenient to define several further compound
Eighteen such compound functions,

The eight atomic

functions,

(rather than bit strings),

(as bit
it will

built from these atomic functions:

mostly for byte manipulation,

are defined below.

(Since only

54 letters appeared in the alphabet defined in Section 5, we may assume without loss of generality
that no alphabetic symbol is encoded by the byte of zero.)
1)

Count (x,b) = the number of repetitions of the byte b in the byte string

x {formally encoded

as Count(x,b) = StringCount(x,
b, 6) }.

2)

Log* (x)

designating

Plog. (x+1) 1.

{formally

encoded

as

Log* (x) = StringCount(x,0, 1) + StringCount(x, 1,1) }.
3)

Length(x)

4)

Scalar, (x):

designating

comprising a family of functions that for any fixed constant k

scalar product of k-x.
IS(A)

x’s byte length {formally encoded as Length(x) = (Log* (x)+5)/6 }

because

represents the

{Unlike normal multiplication, scalar multiplication is a function under

it is defined

by

Scalarp (x)=0

and

Scalar,.,, (x) = Scalar, (x)+x.

The

- 40notation

2x, 3x, 4x,....

will

be

an

abbreviation

in

this

paper

for

Scalar, (x), Scalarg (x), Scalar, (x), .... .}

5)

Substring (x,i,j) designating the substring of x consisting of its i-th through j-th
into right-justified form

{formally encoded as Shift( Extract(x , 6i-5,6j)

6)

Byte

x’s

7)

Bit

8)

Power (x) = the greatest number

(x,i) designating
(x,i) designating

x’s

i-th byte
i-th bit

bytes put

, 6i-6) }

{formally encoded as Substring(x,i,i) }.

{formally encoded
as Shift ( Extract(x,i,i) , i-1)

ySx

which

is a power of 2

}.

{constructed by setting

Power(x) = Extract(x,Log* (x),Log* (x)) }
9)

Ones (x) = 2-Power(x)—1

{i.e. a sequence of "1" bits whose bitlength equals Log* (x)}.

10)

Maximum (x,y) which can be defined as x + (y- x)

{Since Section 2’s definition of subtrac-

tion indicated that y - x = 0 when x2y }.
11)

Minimum (x,y)

12)

And(x,y) = bitwise AND of x and y {constructed by setting

13)

Indicate

14)

(x,y)

defined similarly as x + y - Maximum(x,y).

=

x

when

y#0,

it equals

zero

Indicate(x,y)

= x/(y/y)

Find (x,i,b)

designating the address in the byte string

when

x of the

(if such an occurrence exists), and

Find(x,i,b) = 0 otherwise.

than 64

for

(so that it is impossible

Next (x,i,b)

=

K

{formally

encoded

as

{Let

b

K .be any integer greater
Then

Find(x,i,b)

can be

}
x

of the first occurrence of the byte

right of the address i (if such an occurrence exists), and
u-—v

}

i-th occurrence of the byte

to designate a byte).

the address in the byte string

Since Section’2 defined

y=0.

since section 2’s definition of division indicated that a/0=0.)

encodedas Address(x,b,K,i,6)/6.
15)

and

And(x,y) = Andreverse(x,y, 1, 1).}

Next(x,i,b)

as equal to zero when uSv,

b

to the

= Length(x) otherwise.

Next(x,i,b) can be encoded as

Find [x , Count(Substring(x, l,i), b) + 1, b] + Indicate[ Length(x) , 1 — Find(x, Count(Substring(x, l,i), b) + 1, b) J.

16)

Bracket (x,i) = the address in the byte string x of the first occurrence of either the byte

"{"

or

"}"

Minimum

17)

to

the

right

[ Next(x,i,"{")

ReverseOrder

(x)

of
,

for

address

i.

It

of

length

is

formally

encoded

as

L = Log*t(x)

such

that

encoded

as

Next(x, i, "}" )]

designating

Bit(s,i) = Bit(x, L+1-i)

the

the

each

Andreverse(x , Ones(x), 1, Log* (x) ).

bit-string
i<L+l.

s

ReverseOrder(x)

is

formally

wd «
18)

ReverseAddress (x,b,c,j)
contains

j

indicating the greatest integer k where

more appearances of the byte
does

than of the byte

ReverseAddress(x,b,c,j)=0

if

Address

and

since

Address

with the bytes processed in reverse order}.

ReverseOrder,

k

b

not exist

Substring(x, k, Length(x))
c

(if such k exists),

{trivially encoded

with

and

the functions

ReverseAddress is essentially the same as the function

Recall that Section 5 indicated that a tree, whose root contains the string P and where the subtrees {0,}, {2}, {03}, ‘** {Gy} are the children of the root, will be encoded as the parenthesized
expression { P { 04 } {2}

{03}

+: {O,}

}. The symbol P will henceforth be called the root’s princi-

ple string, and it will be assumed to be a non-empty string containing no instances of the special
punctuating

bytes

"{" or "}". Each node

{0}

descending from the root will have an analogous

recursively defined construction.
Lemma

A.2. There exists a Ag formula TreeCheck(s) which will determine whether an arbi-

trary byte string s is a parenthesis tree (as defined above).
Proof. It is easy to verify that s is a parenthesized tree if and only if it satisfies the following
five conditions:
i)

the first byte in s is "{" and its last byte is "}";

ii)

Every "}" byte, except for the last byte of s,

is immediately followed by a byte which

is either "{" or "}";
iii)

No

"{" is immediately followed by the byte

"}"

or

"{"

(since at the very least a

nonempty principle string will separate these two bytes);
iv)

the same number of "{" and

v)

For eachi< Length(s),

"}" bytes appear in s ;

there are more appearances of "{"

than

"}"

among the first i

bytes of s.
The formal encoding of these five conditions as Ap formulae are indicated below:
i)

Byte(s,1)="{"

A Byte(s,Lengths(s)) = "}"

ii)

Wi<Length(s)

:

Byte(s,i)=")"

>

Byte(s,itl)="}" or "{"

iii)

Vi<Length(s)

:

Byte(s,ij)="{"

>

Byte(s,itl1)#"}" or "{"

iv)

Count(s, "}" ) = Count(s, "{" )

v)

Wi<Length(s): i=O V Count(Substring(s, 1,i),"{") > Count( Substring(s, 1,i),"}")

ye
Hence TreeCheck(s) can be encoded as Ag formulac, because it is a conjunction of the preceding five
Ay formulae.

QED

Lemma A.3. In this paper, a binary tree is defined as a rooted tree, where every internal node
has one or two children. There exists a Ag formula,

BinaryTrecCheck(s),

which indicates whether

Proof. Equation (A.4) is a Ay formula which yields FALSE when s

is a binary tree, yields

or not a string s so encodes a binary tree.

TRUE when s

is anon-binary tree, and its truth-valuc is unpredictable when

3x, <Length(s) 3x2 <x, 3X3 < x2 3x4 <x3

s is not a tree.

: TreeCheck( Substring(s ,x2,x,;)) A

TreeCheck( Substring(s , x3 ,X2—1 ) ) A TreeCheck( Substring(s , xs ,x3 —1 ) )

(A.4)

Since both TreeCheck(s) and Equation (A.4) have Ag encodings, so will there be a Ag encoding for
the statement that TreeCheck(s) is true and Equation (A.4) is false. The latter formula is a Ag encod-

ing for BinaryTreeCheck(s).

QED

Let s denote a byte string encoding a tree with N nodes in parenthesized notation. Each node v
of this tree will be associated with a unique principle string.

Define the index of v to be the integer

indicating the number of "{"

symbols which are positioned in the byte string s to the left of v’s

princible string. (Each of the

N_ nodes in a byte string

index number between

N.)

1 and

s will be thus associated with an unique

Lemma A.4 (below) describes functions, ranging over the set of

index numbers, induced by s.
Lemma

A.4.

Five further compound

functions, which are well defined whenever s is a

parenthesized encoding of a tree, are:
a)

NODE(i,s) designating the byte address of the i-th symbol “{" in s if this symbol exists (and
zero otherwise).

b)

INDEX{(j,s) indicating how many repetitions of the symbol "{" appear among the first j bytes
of s.

(Since INDEX(NODE(i,s), s) = i, the INDEX

function can be viewed intuitively as the

inverse of the NODE function.)
c)

PRINCIPLE(i,s) representing the substring which is NODE(i,s)'s

principle string.

d)

ANCESTOR(i,L,s) indicating the index of the ancestor of i which lies L levels above i, if such
an ancestor exists (and where ANCESTOR(i,L,s) = 0 if this ancestor does not exist in s);

e)

PARENT(i,s)

=

ANCESTOR(i,1,s)

- 43 Proof The formal encodings of functions (a) thru (d) appear below:

NODE(i,s)
INDEX(j,s)
PRINCIPLE(i,s)

ANCESTOR(i,L,s)

= Find(s,i, “‘{”)

(A.5)

= Count( Substring(s, 1,j), ‘'{” )

(A.6)

= Substring(s , NODE(i,s)+1 , Bracket(s, NODE(i,s))—1

)

(A.7)

= INDEX{ReverseAddress( Substring(s,
|, NODE(i,s)) , ‘*{” , ‘'}”, L+1), 5}

(A.8)

Notation: The exponent A will always denote a fixed constant employed to establish the range
for the quantifiers

V

v<x* and

Jv <x*.

We will demonstrate how various logical constructs can

be expressed with formulae so ‘‘majorized’’ by 4. Lemma 5.1 indicated that each ‘‘majorized formula’’ can be transformed into a Ap formula.

Thus while the next fourteen propositions technically

discuss only majorized formulae, they implicitly indicate the existence of Ap formulae as well.
Lemma A.5.
of a formula.

Proof

Let FormulaCheck(x) express that the byte string

Then FormulaCheck(x)

Sketch.

[ASU86,LRS76],

Since

the

a parse tree confirming that

x

can be encoded as a majorized formula.

set

each such formula

x is a well defined encoding

of

well-defined

formulae

is

context

x must be associated with some string

is a well defined encoding.

let us assume that the principle string of the

i-th

t<x %

free

language

such that

t is

Let PARSE(t,x) therefore represent the

formula indicating that t is a parse tree showing that x is well defined.

“*1B’’, where

a

Without loss of generality,

leaf in the tree t consists of a 2-byte sequence

‘‘!’’ is a special punctuation mark indicating the presence of a leaf, and B

is a byte

corresponding to the i-th byte of x. It is easy to prove that one can formally encode the relation
PARSE(t,x)

i)

asa

Ap formula.

This is because

For each individual production
Testp(i,t),

P

which expresses that the

in the Grammar,
i-th

node in the string

P. For example, if P represents E — FG,
dj<tdk<tVm<t

:j<kA

one can trivially encode a Ag formula
t is a root node for the production

then Testp(i,t) would be the Ap formula

{ PRINCIPLE(i,t)=E A PRINCIPLE(j,t)=F A

(A.9)

PRINCIPLE(k,t)=G A PARENT(j,t) = i = PARENT(k,t) A (PARENT(m,t)=i > m=j ork) }
Thus for any context free grammar with L productions,
Test; (i,t) V Testz(i,t)
Grammar’s

L

V «**

productions.

one can construct a Ap formula

V Test (i,t)

indicating that the

Then

is a Ap formula asserting that

(A.10)

i-th

node satisfies one of the
t is a valid parse

- 44 tree. (In Eq (A.10), the parenthesis expression to the left of > indicates that i is a valid index
number,

and it is presumed that the Grammar’s terminal symbols [ASU86,LRS76]

are recog-

nized by a degenerate production Testo(i,t), which has an empty string to the right of "—>".)

Vi<t
ii)

: NODE(i, t}#0 >

| Equation (A.11) is a Ag formula which states that V i S$ Length(x) if B
then the i-th leaf of t will store
VisLength(x)

The

{Testo(i,t) V Test; (i,t) V Test,(i,t) V ... V Test, (i,0)}

formal

Ag

TreeCheck(t)

encoding

of

(A.10)

is the i-th

byte of x

‘‘\B’’ in its principle string.
: Byte(x, i) = Byte(t, Find(t,i, ‘‘!”)+1)

PARSE(t,x)

will thus be the assertion

(A.11)

that the conjunction

of

and Equations (A.10) and (A.11) holds.

The first sentence of this proof indicated that
A t<x* satisfying PARSE(t,x).

x is an encoding of a formula if and only if

Since PARSE(t,x) was just shown to have a Ag encoding, it follows

that FormulaCheck(x) has a majorized encoding.

QED

Lemma A.6 There exists a majorized formula,

SentenceCheck(x),

indicating that

x

is a well

defined encoding of a sentence.
Proof.
declaration

Without loss of generality we may assume that a formula’s every universal quantifier
‘‘V ?[k]”’ and every existential quantifier declaration

‘‘J [k]’’ is immediately followed

by a pair of left and right parenthesis symbols indicating their range. The left and right parenthesis
symbols

“(" and

curly brackets

"{"

")"

within a formula clearly induce an implicit tree structure,

and

"}"

providing a tree structure for the encoding of a proof.

analog of Lemma A.4’s ANCESTOR

which yields True when
substring

analogous to the

function,

we can easily devise a Ag formula

i<j A Byte[x,i] = Byte[x,j] = “and

Thus using an
Test, (i,j,k,x)

Byte(x,j)

is the initial byte of a

‘Y[k] ’ that lies within the range of some quantifier declaration,

“W9IK]”’ or ‘B0Iky”,

indicated by x’s i-th byte.
Also, it is easy to develop a Ag formula

Test, (j) which yields True when

and it corresponds to the second byte of a substring “Pk”?
Test , (i,j,k,x) and Test (j) have Ap definitions,
Vj <Length(x) Sisj 3k<x
It is clear that a string
FormulaCheck(x)

x

: Byte(x,j)= “”

or “S0[K]”,

Byte[x,j] = ‘0’,

lying within

x. Since

so can (A.12) be expressed as a Ap formula.
>

Test, (i,j,.k,x)
V Test (j)

(A.12)

represents a sentence if and only if it satisfies the conjunction of

and Equation (A.12).

Since both these formulae have majorized encodings,

so

«dif.
must also the formula SentenceCheck(x),

X,;

asserting their conjunction,

be majorized.

QED

Lemma A.7 There exists a majorized formula ReplaceCheck(x,,5;,%2,82)

which specifies that

and

s,;

x»

are identical byte strings,

exccpt that appearances of the substring

within

x,

are

ReplaceCheck(x,,8;,X2,S2)

as

replaced by s2 in x.
Proof.

There are many different simple methods for encoding

a majorized formula.

We will illustrate one.

Say two byte strings

d and

e

sequential order the bytes from x;

double encode
and

x

element of the string x; precisely when

the strings

x;

and

subject to the constraint that

Byte(d,j) = i or 3.

Fori=1

x2

iff e enumerates in

Byte(e,j)

represents an

or 2, this condition will be

encoded by the Ap formula Test; (d, ¢, x; ) indicated below:
Vm SLength(x;) 3nSLength(c): {0<m=Count(Substring(d,
1,n),3) + Count(Substring(d, I,n),i) A Byte(d,n)=i or 3}
>

Byte(e,n)

= Byte(x;,m)

(A.13)

An analogous Ap formula can enforce the constraint that Byte(d,j) always equals 3 except when
i)

d-contains a block of consecutive

‘‘1’’ bytes of cardinality = Length(s,;)

of consecutive ‘‘2’’ bytes of cardinality = Length(s2),
ii)

followed by a block

and

the corresponding fragment of e enumerates the substring s, followed by sp.

Hence there exists a Ag formula,
constraints (i), (ii) and

ReplaceTest(x; ,s;,X2,S2,d,e),

Test, (d,e, x, ) A Test2(d,e, x2)

mula expressing the condition
dd< {Max(x,,X2)}°

denoted as

simultaneously.

ReplaceCheck( x, , S; , X2,S2)

de< {Max(x1,X2)}°

which enforces

Then a majorized for-

will be

: ReplaceTest( x; , 8; ,X2,S2,d,e)

(A.14)

QED
Observation A.8.

Several of the proofs in this Appendix will require that we be quite precise

about how an integer will be encoded as a bit string.
employed,

Two methods for encoding integers will be

its natural encoding and its godelized encoding.

i will be denoted as simply

i : it will denote

ized encoding of i, defined in Section 5,

The former representation of an integer

i’s representation as a base-2 number.

represented

a termination byte

i as a sequence of

bytes,

B,,

encoding i as a base-32 number.

(Without loss of generality we may assume that a base-32 digit b
32+b.)

and

log32 il+3

including an initialization byte

will be formally represented by the 6-bit code

B2,

The godel-

Henceforth

logs iJ+1 > main bytes for

i°

will denote

i’s godelized

- 46 encoding.

Since

i” > i®/5,

constitutes a total function.
Equation (A.15),

IS(A) will be incapable of recognizing that the mapping of i onto i”
However,

it will be able to recognize as a relation, the Ag formula in

denoted as ConvertCheck (i, i’),

which expresses this relationship between

i* . (The formal encoding of ConvertCheck (i, i’),

in Equation (A.15),

i and

utilizes the fact that multi-

plication by the scalar constants of 5 and 6 is recognized by IS(A) as total functions.)

Vm<Length(i')
Wns5 : (m22An>0) > Bit(i’,6m)=1 A Bit(i’, n+6(m—1))
= Bit(i, n+5(m-2))} A
Byte(i’,1)=B, A Byte(i", Length(i’))=B,
Corollary A.9.

(A.15)

Part (a) of Theorem A.1 is a consequence of the preceding lemmas.

(That is,

SUBST; (x,y) can be encoded as a majorized formula.)
Proof.

Let Test; (x) be a formula which yields

TRUE

iff x is the Godel number of a for-

mula which contains at least one appearance of the variable Qi],
is free.

Lemma

ReplaceCheck

A.5 trivially implics

and every occurrence of fi] in x

Test; (x) can be encoded as a majorized formula.

and ConvertCheck also have majorized encodings,

Since

it is apparent that Equation

(A.16) (below) is a majorized encoding of SUBST; (x,y).
{ Assy : ConvertCheck(x, s)

A ReplaceCheck(x, y, l Sui |,s) ATest;(x)

}

V

{—Testj(x)

A y=0}

(A.16)

QED
Observation A.10.
that the byte string

Define the formula

ConcatenateCheck,, (Z, X;,X2,

z is begotten by concatenating

x;,X2,

°°"

»%m-

prove that concatenation is a total function over the domain arguments

tainly can represent ConcatenateCheck,,

(Zz, X;,%X2, °°" »Xm)

°°"

»Xm) to indicate

While IS(A) is too weak to
xX, ,X2, °**

aS a Ag formula.

,Xm,

it cer-

For instance,

Equation (A.17) is a Ap representation of ConcatenateCheck2 (z, X; , X2).
Substring(z, 1,Length(x,;))=x,
Lemma A.11.

A Substring(z,Length(x}+1 ,Length(z))=x2

(A.17)

There exists a majorized formula InductAx(s) which indicates that s is a Godel

number of one of Peano Arithmetic’s induction axioms.
Proof.

Peano Arithmetic’s induction axioms consists of all sentences of the form:
(0)

A Vv(M(v)

> O(v+1))

D

Vw)

(A.18)

Define the focal substrings of Equation (A.18) to be its subformulae "®(0)", "D(v)", "@(v+1)" and
"“@(w)".

Since as byte strings these subformulae are identical except for a change in their base term,

Lemma A.7 implies a majorized formula can recognize when two strings are identical except for

a8T
such a modification.

Hence,

there shall exist a majorized formula Testi (a,, 02, 3, Oy) that

checks whether four strings 01, O, @3 and Oy differ only by replacing "0" in the first string with
"vy", "v+l" and "w" in the latter three strings.
Define Test2 (s, 1, G2, 03, Os) to be the statement that the string
catenating the four focal substrings a, = (0), &
manner indicated by Equation (A.18).

= @(v), G, =@(v+1),

s

is begotten by con-

and a, =@(w)

in the

By Observation A.10, there will exist a Ag encoding of

Test2 (s, &, 2, 3, Oy).
Also, Lemma

A.6 indicates that the formula SentenceCheck(s) is a majorized expression that

verifies that s is indeed a well defined sentence. The preceding observations imply that a majorized
encoding for InductAx(s) is

Ja, <s Jay <s 3a; <sdoy<s
Corollary A.12.

: Testl (0), G2, 03, Oy) A Test2 (s, 1, G2, OH, Gy) A SentenceCheck(s)
The three assertions of Part (b) of Theorem A.1 are valid.

That is, there exist

three majorized formulae which confirm whether a Godel number is an axiom of Peano Arithmetic
(PA),

of PA+, or of Zermello Fraenkel Set Theory.

Proof.

Lemma A.11 showed that the induction axioms of PA can be recognized by a major-

ized formula.

Since the remaining noninduction axioms of Peano Arithmetic are only finite in

number,

a majorized formula must certainly be able to also recognize them.

Hence,

Peano Arith-

metic certainly satisfies Corollary A.12.
Similar proof methodologies apply also to PA+ and Zermello Fraenkel Set Theory, since they
contain also only a finite number of axioms outside an easily recognized infinite schema.
Lemma

QED

A.13 The notion of a ‘‘Positive Rewrite’’ was defined in Section 5. There exists a

majorized formula PositiveCheck(g,h) which checks whether h equals the Positive Rewrite of g.
Proof Outline For the sake of simplifying the proof’s notation,

we will assume that each sen-

tence g is written in a syntax where its first "(" symbol appears to the immediate right of its rightmost broad quantifier.

Define Prefix(g) to be the fragment of byte string g that lies to the immedi-

ate left of this "(" symbol,
Prefix(g).

and define Suffix(g)

to be the remainder of g_ that lies to the right of

Both these functions are recognized by IS(A), since they can be encoded by combining

the functions Substring, Find and Length,

as illustrated below:

Prefix(g) = Substring(g, 1, Find(g, 1, ‘(” )-1 )

(A.22)

Suffix(g) = Substring( g , Length(Prefix(g)}+1 , Length(g) )

(A.23)

(A.19)

- 48 Also define Parity(g,i) to be a function that equals zero

iff there are an even number of appearances

of the symbol "4" among the first i bytes of g, and

iff there are an odd number of appearances

of "4".

one

Equation (A.24) illustrates how Parity(g,i) can be encoded.

Parity (g) = And (1, Count( Substring(g, 1,1), “1” ) )

(A.24)

Define Test1 (g,x) to be a formula that is satisfied only by the unique string x which is identical

to Prefix(g),

Parity(g,i)

= 1.

except

that its i-th byte

is changed

from

"V"

to "3"

(and

vice versa)

when

A Ap encoding of the formula Test! (g,x) is given below:

VisLength(Prefix(g))

: { [(Parity(g, i)=0 V Byte(g,i)4''3” V Byte(g,i)#'‘V”)>Byte(x, i)=Byte(g,i)] A
[(Parity(g,
i)=1 A Byte(g,i)="3”)>Byte(x,i)=""V"]

A

{(Parity(g,i)=1 A Byte(g,i)="‘V”)>Byte(x,i)="‘3” ] )
A

Length(x) = Length ( Prefix(g) )

(A.25)

Define Test2 (x, y) to be a formula which asserts that x and y are identical byte strings except
that each appearance of the symbol

"—"

in x is removed

from y.

Lemma

A.7

implies

that

Test2 (x,y) will have a majorized encoding.
Define Test3 (g,h,x,y) to be a formula which asserts that Testl (g,x) and Test2 (x,y) are true

and that h equals
i)

the concatenation of y with

Suffix(g)

when

Parity(g,

Length(Prefix(g))) = 0 ;

ii)

the

of

the

symbol

“-"

triple

concatenation

y,

and _

Suffix(g)

when

Parity(g , Length(Prefix(g))) # 0.
The combination of the preceding discussion and Observation A.10 imply that Test3 (g,h,x,y) can be
provided with a majorized encoding.

willbe

Hence, a majorized formula representing

3x <g? Jy <g? : Test3(g,h, x, y)

PositiveCheck(g,h)

| QED.

We are now almost ready to prove Part (c) of Theorem A.1.

Define a sentence tree to be a

binary tree where the principle string of each node is a well-defined sentence. Equation (A.26), henceforth called

SentenceTreeCheck(t),

Lemmas A.3 and A.6 indicated that

will verify that
BinaryTreeCheck(t)

a byte string
and

t is a sentence tree.

SentenceCheck(s)

Since

are majorized for-

mulae, it follows that Equation (A.26) represents SentenceTreeCheck(s) as a majorized formula,
BinaryTreeCheck(t) A { V i<t:

NODE(i,t) #0 > SentenceCheck( PRINCIPLE(i,t))}

(A.26)

- 49 The following lemma is the main component of the proof of Part (c) of Theorem A.1.
Lemma

A.14.

Assume that the byte string

exists a majorized formula

DeductionCheck(i,t)

t satisfies

which specifics that the sentence

is a valid deduction from some ancestor of NODE(i,t),
tion rules [Sm68,Fi90]

SentenceTreeCheck(t).

for eliminating the symbols

Then there

PRINCIPLE(i,t)

using the standard semantic tableaux deduc-

“*A”,

‘“V”,

‘'3”,

“VW”,

‘*3”,

and right

shifting and/or eliminating ‘‘”.
Proof.

1.
tule

The twelve permissible deduction rules in a semantic tableaux proof are listed in Figure

Arule of the form a — B indicates that B is a valid deduction from its ancestor a. Also the
a -— B81 y

in Figure 1

indicates that the two sibling nodes

B

and

y

may be jointly

inferred form their common ancestor @.
For j<9

and arbitrary sentences

and

B (encoded as byte strings),

formula which is satisfied when the concatenated byte string
1.

For j$8,

‘‘a—f’’

let Test; (a,B) be a

satisfies Rule j in Figure

each Test; (a,B) can be encoded as a majorized formula by employing

teCheck in a straightforward manner.

The formula Testy, (o,$)

Concatena-

for Rule 9 can likewise be encoded

very simply by using ReplaceCheck.
Let Check; (i,t) be a formula stating that PRINCIPLE(i,t) is a deduction in the proof tree t by
applying the Rule j to one of the ancestors of NODE(i,t).

For

j<9, Equation (A.27) is a majorized

formula expressing this relationship.

AL St

: Test ;(PRINCIPLE( ANCESTORG,L,t), t) , PRINCIPLE(i, t) )

For j = 10,

11 or 12,

Check; (i,t)

as a majorized formula.

parameter

u

must

(A.27)

an only slightly more complicated construction is needed to formulate
The only further requirement to encode Rule

not be also employed by any of P(u)’s ancestors;

10

is that the

this condition can be easily

encoded as a majorized formula using the ANCESTOR and PRINCIPLE functions from Lemma A.4.
The

added

NODE(,t)

requirement

for encoding

Check; (i,t)

and

Checkj

must satisfy the special constraints required by Rules

11

(i,t)

is that the sibling

of

and

12. This is also easily

encoded as a majorized formula using the PARENT and PRINCIPLE functions from Lemma A.4.
Since for each

Check (i,t)

j < 12,

V Check, (i,t)

DeductionCheck(i,t).

QED

Check; (i,t),

V +++

can be encoded as a majorized

V Check;2 (i,t)

will

be

a

majorized

formula,

the formula

representation

for

-50Corollary A.15.

Part (c) of Theorem A.1 is valid. That is, for any axiom system B which can

be encoded by a majorized formula,
Proof.

A byte string

Prfg (x,y) can also be encoded as a majorized formula.

y will be a semantic tableaux proof of x from an axiom system

B

iff

itis a sentence tree satisfying the following three constraints:

1)

Its root is the positive rewrite of the negation of the sentence with Godel number

Il)

Every other sentence in the tree y will either be an axiom of B or a deduction from a higher

x.

tree node (via Lemma A.14’s DeductionCheck formula).

mM)

Every branch in the proof tree y is closed.
To prove Corollary A.15,

we must show that there exists majorized formulae for enforcing the

three constraints above. The construction of such formulae are given below:

1)

Let Negation(x,g)

be a Ap formula which asserts that g is a byte string identical to x except

that g contains one additional byte "—." as its lead symbol.

3 g<x?
Since

PositiveCheck

Let NR(x,h)

be the formula

: Negation(x,g) A PositiveCheck(g,h)

(A.28)

was shown by Lemma A.13 to have a majorized encoding,

ing formula also has a majorized encoding.

Hence constraint

I

the preced-

can also be checked by the

majorized formula NR(x , PRINCIPLE(1,y) ).

2)

The hypothesis of Corollary A.15 implies there exists a majorized formula,

henceforth denoted

as

is an axiom of B.

AxiomCheck(i,y),

which indicates whether or not

Since Lemma A.14 indicated that DeductionCheck(i,y)

PRINCIPLE(i,y)

was another majorized formula,

lows that Equation (A.29) is a third majorized formula,
satisfies constraint

Vi<y

3)

Let

Closed(i,y)

QED

V AxiomCheck(i,y)

be a formula which indicates that the tree branch associated with

trivially encoded

~

> DeductionCheck(i,y)

denote a formula which verifies that the i-th node of the tree

that it contains both some sentence

Negation(x,g)

which checks that the proof tree

y

II.

: 0 #NODE(i,y)#1

Leaf(i,y)

it fol-

as majorized

@

formulae,

y

(A.29)

is a leaf,

and

i is closed

(i.e.

and its negation

—®.)

Both these relations can be

using Lemma

A.4’s

ancestor function and the

relation. A majorized formula enforcing constraint III would then simply be:
Vi<y

: Leaf(i, y) > Closed(i,y).

(A.30)

ee
The next two lemmas will help prove Part (d) of Theorem A.1
Lemma A.16 There exists a majorized formula AxGr (x) which expresses that x is the Godel
number of one of IS(A)’s Group-1 axioms.
Proof Sketch.

The set Go

of IS(A)’s Group 1 axioms was defined only informally in Section

2. It will now be necessary for us to define these axioms more formally in section 5’s notation.
each integer k>1,

Go will include two axioms of the precise syntactical form:

C[k] = C[k-1] + ¢[1]
Vv (v <k]

(A.31)

> (v=C[0]
V v=Cll] V v=C[2] V «+:

V v=Clk-1]))

Let Testl (x) and Test2 (x) be two formulae that check whether a Godel number
tence of the respective forms (A.31) and (A.32).

mulae.

Test (x) is encoded by using

ward manner.

For

(A.32)
x

is a sen-

Both these tests can be encoded as majorized for-

ConvertCheck

and

ConcatenateCheck in a very straightfor-

The majorized encoding of Test2 (x) will essentially have two parts. Its first fragment

will employ the function Substring and the formula ConvertCheck to verify that the initial bytes in x
correspond to the string ‘‘Vv (v <@[k]
the string “v=C[k-1]))”’.

string "v = efj]v"

>

(v=C[0] Vv”,

The second fragment of Test2

and its final sequence of bytes consists of
will verify that for each

j}<k—2,

the byte

(in the middle section of x) is immediately followed by string the "v = Cfj-+1]"

(by employing the primitives

Substring and ConvertCheck again in a straightforward manner.)

The axiom group Gg was defined so that it would contain only a finite number of axioms
beyond the two infinite schemes of the form (A.31) and (A.32).
Testl (x)

and Test2 (x)

can determine whether

x

Hence since the majorized formulae

lies in one of these two classes, it is also possi-

ble to provide the full formula AxGr, (x) with a majorized encoding.
Lemma

A.17.

For each nice axiom system A,

QED

there exists a majorized formula AxGr, (x)

which expresses that x is the Godel number of one of IS(A)’s Group-2 axioms.
Proof.

For each II, sentence

®,

Equation (A.33) will represent the corresponding Group-2

axiom of IS(A):

Vv (Prf,(I@l,v) > ®)

(A.33)

It is easy to construct a majorized formula for recognizing the Godel number of a Group-2 axiom,
by combining the results from Lemmas

A.6,

A.8,

A.10

extend Lemma A.6 to construct a majorized formula Test(s)

and

A.15.

In particular,

it is trivial to

which recognizes when a byte string s

«S2«
formally corresponds to the encoding of some I], sentence

®.

both such a string

Since

ing

"@"

and its godelized encoding

"[®]".

Note that Equation (A.33) contains
[4]

is the unique string satisfy-

ConvertCheck(s, [] ), we can use Observation A.8 to conclude that there is a Aj formula for

uniquely recognizing the byte string "[@]".
Moreover,

since the axiom system

A

is nice, the combination of Lemma 5.1 and Corollary

A.15 will imply that
i)

there exists a Ag formula for expressing the relation Prf,([®],v),

ii)

a majorized formula can recognize the byte string which formally encodes (i).
Finally, we observe that Equation (A.33),

catenating the five substrings

of

‘“‘Vv(’’

,

and

viewed strictly as a byte string,
“Pref, ([@], v)”

»,

“D>”,

is begotten by con-

“d”

and

‘‘)’’.

The

preceding discussion has certainly implied that each of these five component substrings of (A.33) can
be individually recognized by majorized formulae.

Moreover since Observation A.10 shows that

arbitrary concatenations can be recognized by a Ag formulae,

it follows that a majorized formula can

certainly determine whether or not an arbitrary string

is a Group-2 axiom,

catenating these five subcomponents.
Corollary A.18.

x

begotten by con-

QED

Part (d) of Theorem A.1 is valid.

That is, for any nice axiom system A,

the

expressions Prfynion(a) (x,y) and ExPrfynioncay (x, ¥,Z) can be encoded as majorized formulae.
Proof Let UNION(A) denote the union of IS(A)’s Group-1 and Group-2 axioms.

nation of Lemmas
expresses that

x

A.16 and A.17 implies that there exists a majorized formula Test(x),
is an axiom of UNION(A).

Hence from Corollary

another majorized formula will express Prfynioncay(X, y).

A.15,

also be expressible as a majorized formula.
Comment.

translate, into

Since ExPrfynioncay(X y, Z) differs from

mula can be translated into a Ag

Ag

the latter must

QED

As already noted,

statements about

which

we may conclude that

the preceding formula only by allowing the additional Godel number z as an axiom,

Added

The combi-

each of the theorems in this Appendix immediately

formulae because Lemma 5.1 shows that every majorized for-

formula.

The sole reason that majorized formulae appeared in our

discussion was that our proofs are simpler by first introducing the majorized formulae, and then relying on Lemma
Go’s

Ao

5.1’s translation methodology.

atomic functions of

formula.

Addition,

Similarly,

StringCount,

Shift

our discussion technically only needed
and

Extract

The sole purpose of Go’s functions of Andreverse,

sion (defined in Section 2) was to simplify the presentation.

to encode Prfjs¢a)(x,y) as a

Address,

Subtraction

and

Divi-

-53APPENDIX
Let

©,

Chapter 11,

B
H

and

Y

have the same meanings in the proof of Proposition 6 as they did in

except that they now pertain to Prfjyyatip.2 rather than to Prfjyyauip.1.

the formula given in Equation (B.1),

H

is the Godel number of the sentence

Thus

D( [o] ),

®

and

is
¥ is

the sentence defined by Equation (B.2).

@ = {Vx Vx3 [SUBST (x, x2) >= Prfyvatip2 (%2, X3)]}
Y=

(B.1)

{ Vx-Prfinvauip2 GH, x) }

(B.2)

To prove Proposition 6, we need to construct a semantic tableaux proof of the sentence (B.2) from
the axiom system INVALID.2, analogous to the semantic tableaux proof which had been employed
in Figure 3 of Chapter 11.
The top seven levels of such a tableaux proof of ‘¥ are shown in Figure 4. Its first two levels
have the same justification as their counterparts in Figure 3. Thus,
porary assumption that

‘Y

is false,

Line 1 is justified as the tem-

and Line 2 is the deduction from (1) following from

existential

quantifier elimination (with parameter p).
The remainder of the Figure 4 is quite different from Figure 3 because INVALID.2 has no
access to the

LIT reflection axioms.

reflection axioms.

Let ©;

Its reflection principle is weaker,

and provides only the UAg

thus denote the Ag sentence:

@; = { SUBST ([®], H) > Prfyvaup2 (H, i) }

(B.3)

Line 3 is INVALID.2’s UAg reflection axiom for ©;. Line 4 is a deduction from
quantifier elimination.
Rule.

For a fixed

(3) via universal

The two sentences on Line 5 are deductions from (4) via the > Elimination

2 >0

whose value will be determined later,

let Q,

and

I

denote the two

I,

sentences defined below:

Q,

=

{Vy Vz3we<z:

[Prfinvaup2 (Hy) Az=y"]

T

=

> Prfinvauip2 ([e,] ,w)}

(B.4)

SUBST([],H)

(B.5)

The two sentences at Level 6 of Figure 4 are each Group-2 Axioms of INVALID.2.
tences at Level 7 are deductions from Level 6, following from the

The four sen-

> Elimination Rule.

-54Assuming the constant

4 is assigned a sufficiently large initial value,

cending from Level 7 can be all closed.
system

G,,

This is intuitively because

the four subtrees des-

INVALID.2’s Group-1 axiom

can be shown to contradict the conjunction of the seven sentences on each branch of

Figure 4’s proof tree (see footnote * for a formal justification of this point). THE MAIN POINT IS
that Chapter 11’s proof of the inconsistency of INVALID.1 produces the verbatim same

proof of

the inconsistency of INVALID.2 , when q from Chapter 11 is merely changed to designate Figure
4’s semantic tableaux.

Summarizing Comment.

The closing two paragraphs in Section 12 had explained how one

would intuitively expect INVALID.2
because

Lemma

theorems

(similar to INVALID.1).

to experience the same inconsistency problem as INVALID.1

12.1 showed that INVALID.2

could prove all its LIT;

The complication in formally proving

semantic tableaux proofs allow

only axioms

intermediate stages of a proof

(i.e. provable theorems are disallowed).

(and their

"cut-free"

the third line in Figure 4’s proof tree can not explicitly specify

as

was that

deductions) to appear in the
Therefore unlike Figure 3,
sentence.

Instead,

LII, reflection by constructing its

this is the reason that q’s

construction was a bit

more complicated in Proposition 6’s proof than it was for Proposition 5.

Since it is well known

[Fi90,Ge69,Sm83,Ta87]

Fundamentally,

Proposition 6

an LI], reflection

Levels 4 thru 7 of Figure 4’s tableaux had implicitly exploited
essential cut-free implications.

reflection sentences

that deductive

(with only a different proof length),

systems

with

and

without

cuts prove the same

theorems

one would intuitively expect that the only difference between

the proofs of Y in Figures 3 & 4 to be the lengths of their proofs

(as has been formally demon-

strated in this Appendix).

* The leftmost branch is closed by using the fact that that when A is assigned a sufficiently large initial value,

Gy,

contradicts the seventh line on the leftmost branch. (In particular for such A, PA+ can (trivially !! ) prove Lemma
§.3’s T-transfgrmation
can construct w from y and z in a manner specified by Equation (B.4), thus contradicting

— Prpa+ (12,

) .) The second branch is the most revealing of the four cases because it is the only case that

uses the fact that G,,

recognizes multiplication as 4 total function. This branch is closed because

Gas multiplication

function enables it to recognize that V7 y diz= y’’, and the latter invariant contradicts the combination of the second,
fifth and seventh sentences on the second branch. The seventh sentence on the third branch is trivially contradicted by
Gy. The second, fifth and seventh sentences on the rightmost branch contradict each other.

References

[ASU86] Compiler Design Theory, A. Aho, R. Sethi and J. Ullman, Compilers: Principles, Techniques and Tools, Addison
Weslcy (1986).

[BeS6}
[Bo79]

[BS76]
[Bu85)
[Bu86]

[En72}
(Fc60}

[Fe62]
[Fe88]
[Fi90]

E.W. Beth, Semantical Entailment and Formal Derivability Indag. Math. 19 (1956) pp. 357-388.
G. Boolos, The Unprovability of Consistency: An Essay on Modal Logic Cambridge University Press, 1979.
A. Bezboruah and J. Shepherdson, Godel’s Second Incompleteness Theorem for Q, Journal of Symbolic Logic 41
(1976) pp. 503-512.
S. Buss, Polynomial Hicrarchy and Fragments of Bounded, Proceedings of 17th Annual ACM Symposium on
Theory of Computing (1985) pp. 285-290
S. Buss, Bounded Arithmetic, Princeton Ph. D. dissertation published in Proof Theory Lecture Notes #3 by
Bibliopolic (1986), scc also (Bu85).
H. Enderton A Mathematical Introduction to Logic Academic Press 1972.
aaa

Arithmetization of Mctamathematics in a General Setting, Fundamenia Mathematicae 49 (1960) pp.

S. Feferman, Transfinite Recursive Progressions of Axiomatic Theories, J. of Symbolic Logic, 27 (1962) 259-316.
S. Feferman, Finitary
Inductively Presented Logics, in Proceedings of Logic Colloquiwn 88, North Holland Publishing House (1989) pp. 191-220.
M. dg First Order Logic and Automated Theorem Proving, Springer Verlag Monograph in Computer Sci-

ence,

i

[Ge69}
[Go30]

G. Gentzen Collected Papers, translated by M.E. Szabo, North Holland , 1969.
aan” Dir Vollstandigkeit der Axiome des logischen Funktionenkalkuls, Monatsh Math Phys, 37, (1930) pp.

[Go31]

K. Godel, Uber formal unentschcidbare Satze der Principia Mathematica und verwandter Systeme, I. Monatsh
Math Phys, 38, (1931) pp. 173-198.

[HB39}
[HP87}
[Je71]
[Je73]
[Je75]

(K138}
(Kr71]

[KT74]
{Loss}
[LRS76]

D. Hilbert and B. Bernays, Grundlager der Mathematik Volume 1 (1934) and Volume 2 (1939), Springer.

P, Hajek and P. Pudlak, Metamathematics of First Order Arithmetic, Springer-Verlag (1987).
R. Jeroslow, Consistency Statements in Formal Mathematics, Fundamentae Mathematicae 72 (1971) pp. 17-40.

R. Jeroslow, Redundancies in the Hilbert-Bemnays Derivability Conditions for Godel’s Second Incompleteness
Theorem Journal of Symbolic Logic 38 (1973) pp. 359-367.
R. Jeroslow, Experimental Logics and AJ Theories, Journal of Philosophic Logic 4 (1975) pp. 253-267.
S. C. Kleene, On the Notaion of Ordinal Numbers, Journal of Symbolic Logic 3 (1938), pp. 150-156.
G. Kreisel, A Survey of Proof Theory, Part I in Journal of Symbolic Logic 33 (1968) pp. 321-388 (see ——
footnote 8 and page 349); Part Il in Proceedings of Second Scandinavian Logic Symposium (1971) North
Holland
Press (with Fenstad ed.), Amsterdam (see especially pp. 117(d) & 166).

G. Kreise] and G, Takeuti, Formally self-referential propositions
tems, Dissertations Mathematica 118, 1974 pp. 1 -55.

for cut-free classical analysis and related sys-

M. Lob, Solution of a Problem of Leon Henkin, Journal of Symbolic Logic 20 (1955) pp. 115-118.
P. Lewis, D. Rosenkrantz and R. Stearns, Compiler Design Theory, Addison Wesley (1976).

[M374]

R. Magari, Su certe teori non enumerabili, Ann. Mat. Pura. Appl.

[Mc87]
[Ro67]

E. Mendelson, Introduction to Mathematical Logic, Wadsworth & Brooks/Cole Mathematics Series, 1987.

[Sc56]
[Sc83]

H. Rogers, Theory of Recursive Functions and Effective Compatibility, McGraw Hill 1967, see especially pp.
186-188.
K. Schutte, Ein System des verknupfenden Schliessens, Archiv. Math. Logic Grundlagenf 2 (1956) pp. 55-67.
H. Schwichteberg, Proof Theory: Some Applications of Cut Elimination, in Handbook on Mathematical Logic,
North Holland Publishing House (1983) pp.

[Sm61]
[Sm68]
[Sm83]
[S094]
[S183]
[Ta53]
[Ta87]
[Wi93]

[Wi94]

98 (1974) pp. 119-152.

867-896.

R. Smullyan, The Theory of Formal Systems, Princeton University Press, 1961.

R. Smullyan, First Order Logic, Springer-Verlag, 1968.
C. Smorynski, The Incompleteness Theorem Handbook on Mathematical Logic, pp. 821-866, 1983.
R. Solovay, private communications (April 1994).
R. Statman, Herbrand’s theorem and Gentzen's Notion of a Direct Proof, in Handbook on Mathematical Logic,
North Holland Publishing House (1983) pp. 897-913.

G. Takeuti, On a Generalized Logical Calculus, Japan Journal on Mathematics 23 (1953) pp. 39-96.
G. Takeuti, Proof Theory, Studies in Logic Volume 81, North Holland, 1987.
D. Willard, Self-Verifying Axiom Systems, in Proceedings of the Third Kurt Godel Symposiwn (1993) pp. 325-

336, published in Springer-Verlag LNCS #713.
D, Willard, The ETR Reflection Principles for Self-Verifying Axiom Systems, forthcoming report.

1)

PAQ

-

P

2)

PAQ

>

Q

3)

—a-73P->

P

4)

APAQ

>

(AP)
V (AQ)

5)

APVO

>

(AP)A(AQ)

6)

4(P5>Q) > PA-=Q

7)

aAVv Pv)

8)

33v Rv) > Vv 4P(y)

9)

Vv

P(v)

—

P(s)

where s is an arbitrary term

10)

dv

P(v)

—

P(u)

whereu is a parameter not used by any ancestor of P(u)

11)

PVQ

>

P

—

Jv

AP)

1!

Q

12)

FIGURE 1

The twelve permissible deduction rules in a semantic tableaux proof are listed above.
the form

oa — B

a —

B 1 y

mon

ancestor

indicates that

f

is a valid deduction

indicates that the two sibling nodes
a.

B

from its ancestor

a.

A rule of

Also the rule

and y may be jointly inferred form their com-

FIGURE 2

(vx { Prfpas([4@l,x) > =

})

(1)

Prf par (41,c) > A®

(2)

GPiteae(1,¢))

(closed

@)

Subtree)

Pivotal

Branch

The canonical form of the top three levels of IS(@PA+)’s terse proof of
false Ao sentence.

Line 1 is a Group-2 Axiom of IS(PA+).

introduces the constant

c

.® when ©

is a

Line 2 is a deduction from Line 1 which

to eliminate the universal quantifier. The two sentences on Line 3 are

deductions from (2) via the > Elimination Rule.

As noted in the proof of Lemma 7.1, the constant

c is chosen to be the Godel number of PA+’s proof of -®@.
the left branch below Line 3 can be trivially closed.

Since

c satisfies Prf pa,( [40], c ),

By definition,

the presence of the sentence —®

at the bottom of the ‘‘pivotal branch’’ implies that the proof is terse.

FIGURE

3

é x Prfinvaup.1 (1.3)

(1)

( Pefowvats (H.p))

(2)

((3xPrfnvauo. (H, >a

o([])

sw {3x Prfpyvauip.: (H, x)}

(Closed

(3)

101) )

Branch )

( Closed

(4)

Subtree)

The top four levels of the Semantic Tableaux Proof of ¥ (stated in Equation (11.3)). Line 1
is justified as the temporary assumption that ‘Y is false. Line 2 is the deduction from (1) following
from

existential quantifier elimination (with parameter p). Line 3 is a I], local reflection axiom.

The left and right sentences on Line 4 are deductions from (3) via the > Elimination Rule.

Line 1 contradicts the left side of line 4, this branch is closed. Also,
tree descending

from

( [ 1)

which

is closed

because

&([@]) model theoretically incompatible with Line 2.

Since

it is easy to construct a sub-

INVALID.1’s

Group-1

axioms

render

(=

é x Prfinvauip.2 (H,x) )

(1)

(Prfrwauwe ip) )

(2)

(v i { Prinvauip2 (19;1) > i)

(3)

(Penvauio2 ([e,1) > °,)

(4)

Panvauins ( [o,] )

(5)

(6)

(7)

(ciosed Subires) (ciosed Subtree)

FIGURE 4.

( Closed Subiree) (Closed Subtree)

INVALID.2’s semantic tableaux proof of V.

