arXiv:1108.6330v8 [math.LO] 31 Dec 2011

A Detailed Examination of Methods for Unifying,
Simplifying and Extending Several Results About
Self-Justifying Logics
Dan E.Willard∗
State University of New York at Albany

Abstract

This paper will develop a single framework for unifying, simplifying
and extending our prior results about axiom systems that retain a partial knowledge of their own consistency, via an axiomatic declaration of
self-consistency. Its perhaps single most surprising new result will be its
exploration of a viable alternative to conventional reflection principles.

Keywords: Gödel’s Second Incompleteness Theorem, Consistency, Hilbert’s Second
Open Question, Semantic Tableaux

Mathematics Subject Classification: 03B52; 03F25; 03F45; 03H13

∗

This research was partially supported by the NSF Grant CCR 0956495. Email = dew@cs.albany.edu.

1

Introduction

Let α denote an axiom system, and d denote a deduction method. The ordered pair
(α, d) will be called Self Justifying when:
i one of α ’s theorems states that the deduction method d, applied to the system α,
will produce a consistent set of theorems, and
ii the axiom system α is in fact consistent.
For any (α, d) , it is easy to construct a second axiom system αd ⊇ α that satisﬁes

Part-i of this deﬁnition. For instance, αd could consist of all of α ’s axioms plus the
following added sentence, that we call SelfRef(α, d) :
•

There is no proof (using d’s deduction method) of 0 = 1 from the union

of the axiom system α with this sentence “SelfRef(α, d) ” (looking at itself).
Kleene [19] discussed how to encode approximate analogs of SelfRef(α, d)’s self-referential
statement. Each of Kleene, Rogers and Jeroslow [19, 35, 17] noted αd may, however, be
inconsistent (despite SelfRef(α, d)’s assertion), thus causing it to violate Part-ii of selfjustiﬁcation’s deﬁnition.
This problem arises in settings more general than Gödel’s paradigm, where α was
an extension of Peano Arithmetic. There are many settings where the Second Incompleteness Theorem does generalize [1, 2, 3, 8, 9, 10, 11, 14, 15, 16, 21, 24, 25, 29, 30, 32,
33, 34, 35, 37, 39, 44, 46, 49, 52, 54, 56, 58, 62, 66, 63, 67]. Each such result formalizes
a paradigm where self-justiﬁcation is infeasible, due to a diagonalization issue. Most
logicians have hesitated to thus employ a SelfRef(α, d) axiom because α+SelfRef(α, d) is
usually inconsistent 1 .
Our research explored special circumstances [61, 64, 65, 66] where it is feasible to
construct self-justifying formalisms. These paradigms involved weakening the properties
a system can prove about addition and/or multiplication (to avoid the preceding diﬃculties). To be more precise, let Add(x, y, z) and M ult(x, y, z) denote two 3-way predicates
1
d

α

Typical ordered pairs (α, d) will have the property that the broader axiom system
= α + SelfRef(α, d) will be inconsistent, even when α is consistent. This is because a standard

Gödel-like self-referencing construction will typically produce a proof of 0 = 1 from αd , irregardless of
whether or not α is consistent.

1

indicating x, y and z satisfy x + y = z and x ∗ y = z. A logic will be said to recognize
successor, addition and multiplication as Total Functions iﬀ it includes 1-3 as axioms.
∀x ∃z

Add(x, 1, z)

(1)

∀x ∀y ∃z

Add(x, y, z)

(2)

∀x ∀y ∃z

M ult(x, y, z)

(3)

We will say a logic system α is Type-M iﬀ it contains each of (1) – (3) as axioms,
Type-A iﬀ it contains only (1) and (2) as axioms, and Type-S iﬀ it contains only (1)
as an axiom. A system is called Type-NS iﬀ it does not contain any of these axioms.
Our investigations [61]–[67] began by observing some Type-A systems can recognize
their consistency under semantic tableaux deduction, and several Type-NS systems can
recognize their Hilbert consistency. Many of these systems were capable of proving Peano
Arithmetic’s Π1 theorems in a language that represents addition and multiplication as
the 3-way predicates of Add(x, y, z) and Mult(x, y, z).
Our self-justifying evasions of the Incompleteness Theorem are diﬃcult to further
extend primarily because the combined work of Pudlák, Solovay, Nelson and WilkieParis [26, 33, 44, 58] showed natural Type-S systems cannot recognize their own Hilbert
consistency. Also, Willard [62, 67, 68] strengthened earlier results of Adamowicz-Zbierski
[1, 3] to establish that natural Type-M system cannot recognize their semantic tableaux
consistency.
A related class of evasions of the Second Incompleteness Theorem was discovered in
[68]. Let us say α is a Type-Almost-M axiom system iﬀ α can prove statements
(4) and (5) as theorems while treating none of sentences (1) – (5) as axioms. (Many
axiom systems, that use function symbols “ + ” and “ ∗ ” for formalizing addition and
multiplication, fall technically into the Type-Almost-M category.)
∀x ∀y ∃z

x+y =z

(4)

∀x ∀y ∃z

x∗y =z

(5)

The preceding is of interest because some surprisingly strong (albeit unusual) TypeAlmost-M systems [68] have an ability to verify their Herbrand but not also semantic
tableaux consistency.
The proofs in our prior papers were challenging primarily because they required one
to separate the local combinatorial methods employed in [59, 64, 66, 68]’s particular
applications from the common principles that underlied behind all these works. Our
Theorems 5.9, 5.11 and 6.6 will rectify this problem by identifying common components
that unite these four paradigms. (Theorems 6.3, 6.10, 6.12, E.1, G.2 and G.3 will then
carry on in further directions.)
2

All these theorems will contain severe limits on their generality, so that the Second
Incompleteness Theorem does not contradict them. It is clearly perplexing to imagine
how humans are able to motivate themselves to cogitate, without their thought processes
possessing some type of at least tentative presumption of their own consistency. Our
research has thus consisted of an approximately equal eﬀort in exploring both [62, 63,
66, 67]’s new generalizations of the Second Incompleteness Theorem and [59, 61, 64, 65,
66, 68]’s unusual boundary-case exceptions to it.
It is clear every boundary-case exception to the Second Incompleteness Theorem has
limited scope because the Incompleteness Theorem is a broadly encompassing result.
This paper will, thus, be addressing a challenging near-paradoxical question about the
maximal nature of self-justiﬁcation that can never be resolved in a fully satisfying manner. The Second Incompleteness Theorem is clearly suﬃciently central to logic for it
to be desirable to know what partial roads of success a self-justifying axiom system can
obtain.

2

Literature Survey

Two 5-page surveys of the prior literature about the Second Incompleteness Theorem
were provided in our articles [64, 66]. This section will present a more abbreviated survey,
focusing on only those developments that are particularly germane to the current article.
The study of incompleteness began with four classic papers by Gödel, Löb, Rosser
and Tarski [14, 25, 36, 50] and with the Hilbert-Bernays exploration of their derivability
conditions [15, 16, 18]. Generalizations of these results for weak axiom systems, such as
Q, began with the work of Tarski-Mostowski-Robinson [51] and Bezboruah-Shepherdson
[8].
Some more notation is needed to describe more recent developments. Let x′ denote
the “successor” operation that maps x onto x + 1. A formula ϕ(x) is called [15] a
Definable Cut for an axiom system α iﬀ α can prove:
ϕ(0) AND ∀ x { ϕ(x) ⇒ ϕ( x′ ) } AND ∀ x ∀ y < x { ϕ(x) ⇒ ϕ(y) }

(6)

Deﬁnable cuts and their cousins have been studied by an extensive literature [1, 3, 6, 9,
10, 15, 18, 21, 22, 26, 27, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 39, 45, 46, 52, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58]. (They
are unrelated to Gentzen’s notion of sequent calculus deductive “cut rule”, which uses
the word “cut” in a diﬀerent context).
A Deﬁnable Cut ϕ(x) is called Non-Trivial relative to an axiom system α iﬀ
α cannot prove ∀ x ϕ(x) , although it can prove (6). Every axiom system α, strictly

weaker than Peano Arithmetic, will contain some non-trivial Deﬁnable Cut. This cut
will have the property that α can verify ϕ(n) for each ﬁxed integer n, although it

cannot prove ∀ x ϕ(x) .
3

Let ⌈ Ψ ⌉ denote Ψ’s Gödel number, and Prf αd (t, p) denote that p is a proof of the

theorem t from the axiom system α using d ’s deduction method. An axiom system

α will then be said to recognize its own Cut-Localized d-Consistency relative to a
Deﬁnable Cut ϕ iﬀ α can prove:
∀p

{

ϕ(p) ⇒ ¬ Prf dα ( ⌈0 = 1⌉ , p ) }

(7)

The recent literature has sought to identify which triples (ϕ, d, α) have this property.
A crucial negative result about Cut-Localized d-Consistency, discovered by Pudlák [33],
established a signiﬁcant generalization of Gödel’s Second Incompleteness Theorem. It
showed that an axiom system α must be unable to prove (7)’s statement about any of its
deﬁnable cuts ϕ , when d represents Hilbert deduction and α is any consistent extension
of Q.
Solovay [44] noted how Pudlák’s result could be combined with the techniques of
Nelson and Wilkie-Paris [26, 58] to establish the following theorem that will often be
cited in this paper:
Theorem 2.1 (Solovay’s 1994 Generalization [44] of a 1985 theorem of Pudlák
[33] using some of Nelson and Wilkie-Paris [26, 58]’s methods ) : Let α denote
any axiom system which contains Equation (1)’s Type-S statement and which assures the successor operation always satisﬁes x′ 6= 0 and x′ = y ′ ⇔ x = y. Then

α will be unable to recognize its own Hilbert consistency, whenever it treats addition and multiplication as 3-way relations satisfying their usual identity, associative,
commutative and distributive properties.

Solovay never published any precise proof of Theorem 2.1’s hybridizing of the work of
Pudlák, Nelson and Wilkie-Paris [33, 26, 58], which he privately communicated [44] to
us. A reader can ﬁnd generalizations of the Second Incompleteness Theorem that are
closely related to Theorem 2.1 in papers by Pudlák, Buss-Ignjatovic, Švejdar and Willard
[10, 33, 46, 63], as well as in Appendix A of [61].
Other interesting observations that preceded our research were that Wilkie-Paris [58]
demonstrated that IΣ0 + Exp cannot prove the Hilbert consistency of even the axiom
system Q,

and that Adamowicz-Zbierski [1, 3] showed that IΣ0 + Ω1 satisﬁed the

Herbrandized version of the Second Incompleteness Theorem. Both these results helped
stimulate [62, 67]’s semantic tableaux generalizations of the Second Incompleteness Theorem for IΣ0 .
A fascinating observation by L. A. Kolodziejczyk [20, 21], about the diﬀerence in
lengths between semantic tableaux and Herbrandized proofs, also motivated our investigation [68] into some surprising properties of unorthodox encodings for IΣ0 . Kolodziejczyk
observed [20, 21] that various generalizations of the Second Incompleteness Theorem for
IΣ0 and IΣ0 + Ωi in [1, 3, 37, 62, 67, 68] imply that the proof of the Herbrandized version of the Second Incompleteness Theorem can be more complicated than its semantic
4

tableaux counterpart. This is because there can be an exponential diﬀerence between
semantic tableaux and Herbrandized proof lengths under extremal circumstances. It was
due to Kolodziejczyk’s insightful communications 2 that [68] developed an axiom system that was a boundary-case exception to the Herbrandized but not also the semantic
tableaux version of the Second Incompleteness Theorem.
The literature on Deﬁnable Cuts has centered its evasions of the Second Incompleteness Theorem around Equation (7)’s localization formalism (rather than employing
analogs of Section 1’s SelfRef(α, d) axiom, as we did in [59, 61, 64, 65, 66, 68]). Pudlák
[33] proved that essentially every axiom system α of ﬁnite cardinality can be associated
with a deﬁnable cut ϕ such that α can prove sentence (7)’s validity for ϕ when d
is either the semantic tableaux or Herbrand-styled deductive method.
Pudlàk’s theorem is related to Friedman’s observation [13] that for many ﬁnite theories S and T , the theory S has an interpretation in T if and only if IΣ0 + Exp can
prove that T ’s Herbrand consistency implies S’s Herbrand consistency. Several generalizations of these results by Krajı́cek, Pudlàk, Smoryński, Švejdar and Visser appear in
[22, 33, 34, 39, 46, 54, 55, 56]. Visser’s article [56] contains an excellent review of this
literature, as well as many additional new results. Also, we will see how some of the reﬂection machines of Beklemishev, Kreisel-Takeuti and Verbrugge-Visser [5, 6, 7, 24, 52, 56]
nicely complement Theorem 6.12’s reﬂection mechanisms in alternate types of intended
applications.
It was established by Hájek, Švejdar and Vopěnka [45, 57] that GB Set Theory can
construct a deﬁnable cut ϕ where it can prove the statement (7) is valid when d denotes
Hilbert deduction and α is ZF Set Theory. This result was surprising because Pudlák
[33] showed GB can never verify its own Hilbert consistency localized on a deﬁnable cut.
(Thus, GB will view its Hilbert consistency as equivalent to ZF’s Hilbert consistency in
a global sense but not in a cut-localized respect.).
In some sense, Kreisel and Takeuti [24, 47] can be viewed as the ﬁrst authors to
develop a logic recognizing its own consistency using a variant of Equation (6)’s formula.
Their results for typed logics formalized a second-order generalization of Gentzen’s sequent calculus that can verify its own consistency, when no sequent calculus deductive
cuts are performed. A key aspect of their formalism can be seen as using an analog of
(7)’s sentence in an implicit manner. It thus begins by using a set of objects, which we
shall call I,

that includes all the standard integers plus some allowed non-standard

2

The Herbrandized and semantic tableaux deﬁnitions of an axiom system α’s consistency are diﬀerent
from each other because the former requires skolemizing α ’s axioms, while the latter permits [12] an
existential quantiﬁer elimination rule to replace Skolemization. This distinction can create a potential
exponential diﬀerence between the lengths of Herbrand and Semantic Tableaux proofs. This insightful
observation, due to private communications from L. A. Kolodziejczyk [20], was used in [68] to create
an axiom system that satisﬁed the semantic tableaux but not also Herbrandized version of the Second
Incompleteness Theorem.

5

integers (that can permissibly represent contradictory proofs). Their second-order logic
then uses Dedekind’s deﬁnition of the natural numbers to construct a subset of I ,
called “ N ”, which includes all the standard integers and which is disallowed to contain
any contradiction proof. We will not go into the details here, but this transition from I
to N (with an accompanying relativization of the provability predicate onto N ’s more
restricted domain) can be viewed as Kreisel-Takeuti’s analog of (7)’s local consistency
statement for [24, 47]’s “CFA” second-order logic.
It is diﬃcult to compare our research (which has relied upon an analog of SelfRef(α, d)’s
Kleene-like “I am consistent” axiom) with the preceding literature that has used various
forms of Localized d-Consistency statements. This is because every eﬀort to evade the
Second Incompleteness Theorem employs some built-in weakness to evade Gödel’s classic
paradigm.
Our work in [59, 61, 64, 65, 68] represented less than a full-scale evasion of the
Second Incompleteness Theorem mostly because it was incompatible with treating as
formal axioms the statements in Equations (3) and (5) that multiplication is a total
function 3 . Some reasons why it was helpful for [59, 61, 64, 65, 68] to employ analogs
of Section 1’s SelfRef axiom are that:
A An axiom’s self-referential “I am consistent” declaration allows a formalism to recognize its consistency in a global sense, rather than in the ϕ−localized sense used by
sentence (7) and the analogous Kreisel-Takeuti relativization of their second-order
proof predicate.
B If a logic is employing a deductive method d that lacks a modus ponens rule, as
occurs in nearly all self-justifying systems, then it is preferable for it to view its “I
am consistent” statement as an axiom rather than as a theorem. (This is because
weak deductive methods are capable of drawing logical inferences only from axioms
when modus ponens is absent.)
C Analogs of Section 1’s SelfRef(α, d)’s “I am consistent” axiom have been shown by
[59, 61, 64, 65, 66, 68] to at least partially formalize the notion of a logic possessing
an almost instinctive form of faith in its own internal consistency. (This paper will
make it apparent that such an instinctive faith is less than a full-scale proof. Yet,
Theorem 6.12 and Remarks 6.13, 6.14 and 6.16 will make it apparent that such
formalizations of instinctive faith are also useful.)
3

This caveat applies also to our article [68], although its Herbandized form of self-justiﬁcation diﬀers
from our other papers by retaining a capacity to treat (5)’s statement about multiplication’s totality as
a derived theorem that is not an axiom. The key point is that theorems are weaker than axioms under
Herbrand deduction because only axioms are used as intermediate steps during proofs. This explains
intuitively how [68]’s formalism was able to recognize its Herbrandized consistency, while treating (5)’s
statement about the totality of multiplication as a theorem. (We will return to this subject in Appendix
D.)

6

We emphasize that both virtues and drawbacks of SelfRef(α, d)’s “I am consistent” axiom
statements have been cited in this paragraph because every eﬀort to evade the Second
Incompleteness Theorem can obtain no more than limited levels of success.
The scope of the challenge we face becomes apparent when one realizes α + SelfRef(α, d)
is inconsistent for most (α, d). This is because α+SelfRef(α, d) typically satisﬁes Parti but not also Part-ii of Section 1’s deﬁnition of a “self-justifying” logic. (Thus, a
diagonalization paradigm will typically imply α + SelfRef(α, d) is inconsistent, as a consequence of it containing SelfRef(α, d) as an axiom.) This is the reason Kleene, Rogers
and Jeroslow [19, 35, 17] were hesitant about the utility of SelfRef(α, d)’s mirror-like
axiom sentence. Our goal in [59]-[68] has been to develop generalizations and boundarycase exceptions for the Second Incompleteness Theorem, so as determine exactly which
paradigms can support, for example, Theorem 6.12’s limited notion of self-justiﬁcation.
The reason one would anticipate some limited exceptions to the Second Incompleteness Theorem to exist is it is hard to imagine how humans can motivate themselves to
cogitate without using some variant of self-justiﬁcation.

3

Generic Configurations

The phrase Bounded Quantifier will refer to expressions of the form “ ∃ v ≤ T ”

or “ ∀ v ≤ T ” where T is a term. A formula is called Fully-Bounded when all its
quantiﬁers are so bounded. Lemma 3.6 will soon explain how Deﬁnition 3.1’s formalism
can encode conventional arithmetic:

Definition 3.1 Let ξ denote some non-integer indexing superscript (whose properties will be discussed later by Deﬁnition 3.4). Then the symbol ∆ξ0 will denote some
ﬁxed special set of fully-bounded formulae that is closed under negation, in a language
that will be later called Lξ . (Thus, if some formula Ψ is a member of ∆ξ0 then so
is ¬ Ψ .) Items 1-3 formalize how Πξn and Σξn formulae are built in a straightforward

manner out of these ∆ξ0 sub-components:

1. Every ∆ξ0 formula is considered to be also a Πξ0 and Σξ0 formula.
2. For n ≥ 1 , a formula will be called Πξn
form of ∀v1 ∀v2 ... ∀vk

Φ(v1 , v2 , ..vk ),

iﬀ it can be written in the canonical

where Φ is Σξn−1 .

3. Likewise for n ≥ 1 , a formula will be called
form of ∃v1 ∃v2 ... ∃vk

Φ(v1 , v2 , ..vk ),

Σξn

iﬀ it can be written in the

where Φ is Πξn−1 .

Notation Convention: Our rules for deﬁning ξ, speciﬁed later in this section, will
never have this superscript designate an integer quantity. This is because integer superscripts have a special meaning under a typed-based hierarchy, not intended here.
7

Example 3.2 Let L denote a conventional arithmetic language that uses function
symbols for denoting addition and multiplication. Below are two examples of ∆0 −like

formulae that invoke Deﬁnition 3.1’s notation:

a The symbol “ ∆A
0 ” will denote any fully bounded formula that uses the addition,
multiplication and maximum function symbols in an arbitrary manner. (Thus, ∆A
0
corresponds to what many textbooks [15, 18, 23] simply call a “ ∆0 ” formula.)
b The symbol “ ∆R
0 ” will denote a class of formulae in L’s language whose bounded
quantiﬁers are allowed to use only the Maximum function symbol. Their bodies,
however, may contain any combination of addition, multiplication and maximum
function symbols.
R
Formulae (8) and (9) illustrate the distinction between the ∆A
0 and ∆0 classes. Thus,

(8) satisﬁes the ﬁrst but not second condition (on account of the presence of the multiplication symbol used by its bounded quantiﬁers). In contrast, (9) is an example of a
∆R
0 formula.
∃y ≤ x∗x
∃y ≤ x

∀z ≤ y ∗y
∀z ≤ y

∃w ≤ y ∗z

∃ w ≤ Max(y, z)

:

:

{

x∗y =z+w

}

(8)

{

x∗y =z+w

}

(9)

R
The distinction between ∆A
0 arithmetic formulae and the unconventional ∆0 class may

ﬁrst convey the impression that these two classes have fundamentally diﬀerent natures.
Actually, Lemma 3.6 will show that their relationship is more subtle. This is because
R
its formalism will map ∆A
0 formulae onto ∆0 expressions that are equivalent to it under

Deﬁnition 3.3’s Standard-M model — in a context where only the length of these
formulae is allowed to possibly grow. This equivalence enabled [68] to construct a natural
axiomatic formalism that could recognize its own Herbrandized consistency but which
nevertheless satisfied the idealized form 4 of the semantic tableaux version of the Second
Incompleteness Theorem.
Definition 3.3 “Standard-M” will denote the standard model of integers.
The reason for our interest in Standard-M is that many pairs of formulae are equivalent under the Standard-M model, while weak axiom systems often cannot formally prove
they are equivalent. For instance, this will occur when Example 3.5 examines Deﬁnition
3.4’s properties.
4

An axiom system α is deﬁned to satisfy the “idealized form” of the semantic tableaux version
Second Incompleteness Theorem when no β ⊇ α can prove a semantic tableaux proof of 0=1 from itself
is incapable of existing. We will summarize [68]’s formalism and the distinction between Herbrandized
and semantic tableaux deduction at the of Appendix D.

8

Definition 3.4 A Generic Configuration, often identified by the superscript symbol of ξ , is defined to be a 5-tuple ( Lξ , ∆ξ0 , B ξ , d , G ) where:
1. Lξ is a language that includes logical symbols for “0”, “1”, “2”, “=”, “≤” and for
the operation of “Maximum(x,y)”. Lξ also includes a suﬃcient number of function
and constant symbols so that every integer k can be encoded by some term Tk
specifying k ’s value.
2. ∆ξ0 corresponds to any variation of Deﬁnition 3.1’s class of “fully-bounded” formulae that is rich enough to assure that there exists two ∆ξ0 formulae, henceforth
called “Add(x, y, z)” and “Mult(x, y, z)”, for formalizing the graphs of addition
and multiplication. (It will generate ξ’s set of Πξn and Σξn sentences, using Deﬁnition 3.1’s 3-part formalism.)
3. B ξ denotes a “Base Axiom System”, whose axiom-sentences are true under
the Standard-M model and which is Σξ1 complete. (Thus, B ξ can prove every true
Σξ1 sentence, and it can likewise refute all false Πξ1 sentences.)
4. d denotes ξ ’s method of deduction. It is required to be suﬃciently conventional to satisfy the usual indirect-implication property 5 associated with Gödel’s
Completeness Theorem.
5. g denotes a method for encoding the Gödel numbers of proofs.
Example 3.5 Let us recall Example 3.2 deﬁned “ ∆A
0 ” as essentially the conventional textbook notion [15, 23] of an arithmetic “ ∆0 ” formula. This example will outline
how well-known techniques can map every ∆A
0 formula onto a semantically equivalent
∆ξ0 formula under the Standard-M model.
Our discussion will have Seq(x) denote a function that maps non-negative integers
onto binary strings in lexicographic order. Thus Seq(x) maps 0 onto the empty string,
the integers 1 and 2 onto the strings of “0” and “1”, the integers 3–6 onto “00”, “01”,
“10”, “11”, etc. (Formally, Seq(x) is an operation that maps integer x onto the bitstring that occurs to the immediate right of the leftmost “1” bit in the binary encoding
of x + 1. )
Given any k−tuple ( x1 , x2 , ... xk ), let STRING(x1 , x2 , ... xk ) denote the concatenation of Seq(x1 ), ... Seq(xk ). For any integers v and w satisfying v ≤ w2 , it is clear

that there exists (x1 , x2 , x3 ) where STRING(x1 , x2 , x3 ) represents v’s binary encoding
and each xi ≤ Max(w, 4).
5

This is that irregardless of whether or not d contains a built-in modus ponens rule, it does
support some form of a (possibly quite lengthy) proof of a theorem Z, when it is able to prove X, Y and
(X ∧ Y ) → Z as theorems.

9

An example will now illustrate the approximate structure of an inductive methodξ
ology for mapping ∆A
0 formulae onto their equivalent ∆0 counterparts in the Standard-M

model. Let SQUARE(x1 , x2 , x3 , w) be a ∆ξ0 formula which speciﬁes that STRING(x1 , x2 , x3 )
represents an integer ≤ w2 . Also, let φ∗ (x1 , x2 , x3 ) and φ(v) represent a pair of ∆ξ0 and

∆A
0 formulae that are equivalent under the Standard-M model when STRING(x1 , x2 , x3 )
is an encoding for v . Then one possible method for mapping ∆A
0 formulae onto their
equivalent ∆ξ0 counterparts (in the Standard-M model) could map the formula (10) onto
(11)’s alternate form:
∀ v ≤ w2
∀ x1 ≤ Max(w, 2)

φ(v)

∀ x2 ≤ Max(w, 2)

(10)

∀ x3 ≤ Max(w, 2)

{ SQUARE(x1 , x2 , x3 , w) ⇒ φ∗ (x1 , x2 , x3 ) }

(11)

Lemma 3.6 indicates Example 3.5’s translational methodology generalizes easily to all
combinations of ∆A
0 inputs and generic conﬁgurations ξ , via an approximate inductive
generalization of the transition from sentence (10) to (11). (Its procedure essentially
performs iteratively a ﬁnite number of such transitions, so as to translate all the clauses
ξ
of an initial ∆A
0 formulae into their ∆0 counterparts via an inductive methodology. The

intuition behind these transitions is they will repeatedly replace a single variable, such
as v in sentence (10), with a multiplicity of variables, such as (x1 , x2 , x3 ) in (11).)
Lemma 3.6 (Paris-Dimitracopoulos [28] ) For every generic configuration ξ, each
ξ
∆A
0 formula can be translated into an equivalent ∆0 formula in the Standard-M model
via a generalization of Example 3.5’s process. (This clearly implies ΠA
j formulae can also
ξ
be translated into Πj expressions.)

Paris-Dimitracopoulos [28] sketched an analog of Lemma 3.6’s translation algorithm,
using only slightly diﬀerent notation, that is applicable to any formalism that satisﬁes
Parts (1) and (2) of Deﬁnition 3.4. Their formalism thus uses an inductively-iterated
analog of the prior example’s replacement of a single variable v in formula (10) with
(11)’s multiplicity of variables (x1 , x2 , x3 ) , so as to perform Lemma 3.6’s translation
task. It will be unnecessary for a reader to consider the details behind [28]’s Theorem
1 or Lemma 3.6’s similar translation mechanism because the remainder of this article
will never use them again. Instead, their sole purpose has been to provide an implicit
backdrop for our results by illustrating how the study of the Πξ1 sentences of Deﬁnition
3.4’s generic conﬁgurations provides information about ΠA
1 sentences (after the needed
translating is done).
Four examples of self-justifying systems that employ Deﬁnition 3.4’s Πξ1 sentences
will be illustrated in Appendix D . These examples are too complicated to be examined
before Sections 3 – 6 are read. However, the next example should convey some useful
intuitions:
10

Example 3.7 Let x0 , x1 , x2 , ... and y0 , y1 , y2 , ... denote sequences deﬁned by:
x0

=

2

=

y0

(12)

xi

=

xi−1 + xi−1

(13)

yi

=

yi−1 ∗ yi−1

(14)

For i > 0 , let φi and ψi denote the sentences in (13) and (14) respectively. Also, let φ0
and ψ0 denote (12)’s sentence. Then φ0 , φ1 , ... φn imply xn = 2n+1 , and ψ0 , ψ1 , ... ψn
n

imply yn = 22 . Thus, the latter sequence grows at a faster rate than the former.
Much of our research has used the diﬀerence between the growth rates of x0 , x1 , x2 , ...
and y0 , y1 , y2 , ... as a motivating example explaining why Equation (2)’s Type-A axiom
systems can support a stronger form of boundary-case exception to the semantic tableaux
version of the Second Incompleteness theorem than can Type-M systems.
Let Log( yn ) = 2n and Log( xn ) = n + 1 thus designate the lengths of the binary
codings for yn and xn . Then yn ’s coding has a length 2n , which is much larger
than the n + 1 steps that ψ0 , ψ1 , ... ψn use to deﬁne its existence. However, xn ’s
length has a smaller size of n + 1 . These observations are useful because every proof
of the Incompleteness Theorem involves a Gödel number z coding a sentence that has
a capacity to self-reference its own deﬁnition. The faster growing series y0 , y1 , , ... yn
should be intuitively anticipated to have this self-referencing capacity because yn ’s
binary encoding has a 2n+1 length that dwarfs the size of the O(n) steps used to deﬁne
its value. Leaving aside [62, 67]’s many details, this fast growth explains roughly why
many Type-M logics satisfy the semantic tableaux version of the Second Incompleteness
Theorem.
This paradigm also illustrates intuitively why some Type-A systems, employing
[59, 61, 64]’s semantic tableaux formalism, can represent boundary-case exceptions to
the Second Incompleteness Theorem. This is because such formalisms lack access to
Equation (3)’s axiom that multiplication is a total function. (They are unable, thus,
to easily construct numbers z that can self-reference their own deﬁnitions because they
have access only to the slower growing addition primitive.) In particular assuming only
that each sentence in the axiom-sequence φ0 , φ1 , ...φn (from Equation (13) ) requires a
mere two bits for its encoding, the length n + 1 of xn ’s binary encoding will be smaller
than the length of its deﬁning sequence.
This short length for xn had motivated [59, 61, 64, 65]’s evasion of the semantic
tableaux version of the Second Incompleteness Theorem. It suggested that the self11

referencing needed in a Gödel-like diagonalization argument would stop being feasible
when Equation (13)’s slow-growing x1 , x2 , x3 , ... sequence represents the fastest growth
that is possible.
One of the several goals in this article will be to formalize a generalizations of [59,
61, 64, 65]’s self-justifying methodologies by using Deﬁnition 3.4’s generic conﬁgurations.
The proofs of our main theorems will, of course, be more subtle than the hand-waving
intuitions appearing in this example. For instance, the combined work of Pudlák, Solovay,
Nelson and Wilkie-Paris [26, 33, 44, 58] (summarized by Theorem 2.1) raised the subtle
issue that no Type-S system can prove a theorem aﬃrming its own Hilbert consistency.
Another complication is that the Equation (14)’s implication for proofs that use the
multiplication operative has diﬀerent side eﬀects for Herbrandized and semantic tableaux
deduction (on account of Kolodziejczyk [20, 21]’s previously mentioned observations
about the potential exponential diﬀerence between the lengths of these proofs under
extremal circumstances).
Our main theorems will show that self-justifying systems, using four deduction methods, are capable of proving all of Peano Arithmetic’s Πξ1 theorems. Interestingly, selfjustiﬁcation will be compatible with [64]’s modiﬁcation of semantic tableaux deduction,
that includes a modus ponens rule for Πξ1 and Σξ1 type sentences. However, [63] has shown
an analogous modus ponens rule for Πξ2 and Σξ2 sentences is incompatible with self justiﬁcation. (Thus, the contrast between our main results and the Second Incompleteness
Theorem’s generalizations will be quite tight.)

4

Five Helpful Definitions and An Informative Lemma

This section will introduce ﬁve deﬁnitions and prove a Lemma 4.6 about self justiﬁcation.
This lemma will be weaker than Sections 5 and 6’s main results. Its main purpose will
be to provide a useful starting example.
Definition 4.1 The symbol “E(n)” will denote some term in Deﬁnition 3.4’s language Lξ that represents the value 2n . In using this symbol, we do not presume that Lξ
possesses a function symbol for the exponent operation. Thus if Lξ has only a function
symbol for multiplication, then E(n) could designate the term of “ 2 ∗ 2 ∗ ... ∗ 2 ” with
n repetitions of “2” . (Alternatively, E(n) can be deﬁned via applying 2n iterations of

the successor function to zero, or by having a special constant symbol designating 2n ’s
value. Essentially, any reasonable method can be used to deﬁne E(n)’s value)

12

Definition 4.2 Let Υ denote a prenex normal sentence. Then ScopeE (Υ,N) will
denote a sentence identical to Υ except that every unbounded universal quantiﬁer
“ ∀ v ” is changed to “ ∀ v < E(N ) ”, and every unbounded existential quantiﬁer “ ∃ v ”
is changed to “ ∃ v < E(N ) ”. (No change is made among the bounded quantiﬁers

within the ∆ξ0 part of the sentence Υ .) For example, if Υ denotes the Πξ1 sentence
of ∀ v1 ∀ v2 ... ∀ vk

if Υ is the

Σξ1

φ(v1 , v2 , ...vk ) then (15) illustrates ScopeE (Υ,N)’s form. Likewise
sentence of ∃ v1 ∃ v2 ... ∃ vk

φ(v1 , v2 , ...vk ) then (16) illustrates

ScopeE (Υ,N)’s form.

∀ v1 < E(N ) ∀ v2 < E(N ) ...∀ vk < E(N )

:

φ(v1 , v2 , ...vk )

(15)

∃ v1 < E(N ) ∃ v2 < E(N ) ...∃ vk < E(N )

:

φ(v1 , v2 , ...vk )

(16)

Special Note about Definition 4.2’s Meaning. If Υ is a ∆ξ0 sentence then
ScopeE (Υ, N ) will be equivalent to Υ for every N ≥ 0 by deﬁnition. (This is because

∆ξ0 formulae contain no unbounded quantiﬁers that undergo change when Υ is mapped
onto ScopeE (Υ, N ). )
More About this Notation: The potentially lengthy syntactic object of “ ScopeE (Υ,N) ”
will actually not be used in our physical encodings of proofs. Instead, these encodings
will use the more desirably compressed object of “ Υ ” (which has no possibly bulky E(N )
term). The sole function of ScopeE (Υ,N) will be for us to speculate about what Boolean
value Υ would theoretically assume (under the Standard-M model) if Υ ’s quantiﬁers
were modiﬁed so that their ranges were changed to be bounded by E(N ). (It turns out
that ScopeE (Υ,N) ’s ﬁnitized quantiﬁer-range will help simplify our analysis.)
Definition 4.3 A Πξ1 or Σξ1 sentence Υ will be called Good(N) when the entity
ScopeE (Υ, N ) is true under the Standard-M model 6 . Also, a set of Πξ1 sentences, denoted
as θ, is called Good(N) iﬀ all of its sentences are Good(N).
Definition 4.4 If Υ is a Πξ1 sentence then ♯( Υ ) will denote the largest integer J
such that Υ satisﬁes the Good(J) condition. (It will equal ∞ if Υ satisﬁes Good(J) for
all J.) Also, if θ is a set of Πξ1 sentences, then ♯( θ ) will denote the largest J where each

sentence in θ is Good(J).
A Very Helpful Start : Several more deﬁnitions will be needed before Section 6
can present our strongest results. The remainder of this section will illustrate how the
current formalism is already suﬃcient for introducing a useful starting lemma.
6

A quite unusual aspect of Deﬁnition 4.3 is that its Good(N ) condition has opposite properties when
it is applied to Πξ1 and Σξ1 sentences in one particular respect. This is because for each N, the Good( N )
condition is weaker than the Good( ∞ ) condition for Πξ1 sentences, while it is stronger than it for Σξ1
sentences. (For instance, ∀ x φ(x) is stronger than ∀ x < E(N ) φ(x) , but ∃ x φ(x) is weaker than
∃ x < E(N ) φ(x) .)

13

Definition 4.5 Let (Lξ , ∆ξ0 , B ξ , d, G) again denote a generic conﬁguration called
ξ , and let us presume that its base axiom system B ξ is comprised exclusively of Πξ1
sentences. Also, let β ⊃ B ξ denote a second axiom system, comprised also of Πξ1

sentences, that (unlike B ξ ) can possibly be inconsistent. (If β is inconsistent then let
qβ denote the shortest proof of 0 = 1 from β . ) Then the generic conﬁguration ξ
will be called Tight if iﬀ every inconsistent set of Πξ1 sentences β ⊃ B ξ satisﬁes the

following constraint:

Log( qβ ) ≥

♯( β ) + 2

(17)

Lemma 4.6 will prove B ξ +SelfRef(B ξ , d) satisﬁes Section 1’s self-justiﬁcation criteria
whenever ξ is tight. This “tightness” will clearly fail to be satisﬁed by many generic
conﬁgurations. This is because the Second Incompleteness Theorem is a widely encompassing result, which imposes severe restrictions on its allowed exceptions. Lemma 4.6’s
mini-result will be of interest primarily because it will be generalized substantially in
Sections 5 and 6.
Lemma 4.6 If a generic configuration (Lξ , ∆ξ0 , B ξ , d, G) is tight then B ξ +SelfRef(B ξ , d)
will be a consistent self-justifying axiom system.
Proof Sketch: Our justiﬁcation of Lemma 4.6’s mini-result will be simpler than the
next section’s proof of Theorem 5.9’s stronger result. The current proof will also be kept
brief and informal because the same topic will be visited more rigorously during Section
5’s discourse.
Let Ψ denote Section 1’s SelfRef(B ξ , d) sentence. We will omit formalizing Ψ ’s
exact Πξ1 encoding here because Appendix A will provide a more general ﬁxed-point
construction, using Deﬁnition 5.7’s stronger paradigm. The current proof will simply
presume Ψ ’s ﬁxed point statement can receive a Πξ1 encoding under sentence (18),
where “ PrfdB ξ +SelfRef(B ξ ,d) ( ⌈ 0 = 1 ⌉ , p ) ” is a ∆ξ0 formula, indicating that p is a

proof of 0=1 from B ξ + SelfRef(B ξ , d) under d ’s deduction method.
∀p

¬ PrfdB ξ +SelfRef(B ξ ,d) ( ⌈ 0 = 1 ⌉ , p )

(18)

The Deﬁnition 4.4’s symbol ♯ will be helpful at this juncture. The application
of ξ’s tightness to (18)’s Πξ1 styled encoding will imply 7 that (19) must be true when
Ψ is false under the Standard-M model and when the shortest proof of 0 = 1 from
B ξ + SelfRef(B ξ , d) is denoted as q.
Log( q ) =

♯( Ψ ) + 1

(19)

7
Equation (19) is easy to justify when one presumes there is an available Πξ1 encoding of (18)’s
statement, which we call Ψ . (This Πξ1 presumption is reasonable because an analog of Ψ ’s exact Πξ1
encoding will be discussed later by Deﬁnition 5.7 and in Appendix A.) The invalidity of Ψ will thus
assure the existence of a proof of 0 = 1 from B ξ + SelfRef(B ξ , d). Moreover, Deﬁnition 4.4’s notation
implies ♯( Ψ ) will equal Log(q) − 1 when q denotes the shortest proof of 0 = 1 from B ξ + SelfRef(B ξ , d).
The latter shows (19) is valid.

14

Also Deﬁnition 4.4 trivially implies ♯( B ξ + Ψ ) = ♯( Ψ ) (because all of B ξ ’s axioms
are true under the Standard-M model). Thus, (19) yields (20).
Log( q ) =

♯( B ξ + Ψ ) + 1

(20)

But the point is that the Tightness constraint’s Equation (17), used in the context where
β is the axiom system of B ξ + Ψ , implies

Log( q ) ≥

♯( B ξ + Ψ ) + 2 . This

directly contradicts Equation (20)’s equality, whenever the proof “ q ” of 0 = 1 cited
in our discussion does formally exist. This contradiction is precisely what is needed to
corroborate Lemma 4.6’s claim that the axiom system B ξ + SelfRef(B ξ , d) must be
consistent. (Thus, B ξ + SelfRef(B ξ , d) must be consistent because otherwise a proof
q of 0 = 1 would exist and have its Log( q ) ≥ ♯( B ξ + Ψ ) + 2 inequality contradict
Equation (20).)

✷

How Lemma 4.6 May Be Interpreted : We remind the reader that many (but
not all) generic conﬁgurations will fail to satisfy Lemma 4.6’s tightness hypothesis. This
is because any conﬁguration satisfying this hypothesis represents one of those unusual
boundary-case exceptions to the Second Incompleteness Theorem that are feasible.
Lemma 4.6 was intended to capture the simplest variant of a self-justifying phenomena (that employs Deﬁnition 4.4’s machinery). Its proof was kept informal because more
sophisticated self-justifying formalisms will be explored in Sections 5 and 6. They will
apply to four diﬀerent types of generic conﬁgurations, each of whose base axiom systems
B ξ can be made capable of proving all Peano Arithmetic’s Πξ1 theorems — in a context
where these systems use a broader variant of “I am consistent” axiom-statement than
does Lemma 4.6’s “SelfRef(B ξ , d)” sentence.

5

The First Two Meta-Theorems about Self-Justification

The core theorems in this section will employ the following notation:
1. The symbol θ will denote any recursively enumerable (r.e.) set of Πξ1 sentences,
henceforth called a R-View. (An R-View does not need to be valid under the
Standard-M model. It only needs to be r.e.)
2. RE-Class(ξ) shall denote the set of all possible “R-Views” θ that can be built out
of ξ ’s language Lξ . (This permits both valid and invalid R-Views to appear in
RE-Class(ξ). We choose this unrestricted deﬁnition because no recursive decision
procedure can identify all the true Πξ1 sentences in the Standard-M model.)

15

Definition 5.1 Let ξ denote the 5-tuple (Lξ , ∆ξ0 , B ξ , d, G) representing one of Definition 3.4’s generic conﬁgurations, and let RE-Class(ξ) and its R-Views “θ” be deﬁned
as in the previous paragraph. Then ξ is called A-Stable iﬀ each θ ∈ RE-Class(ξ)
satisﬁes the following invariant:
*

If Υ is a Πξ1 theorem of axiom system θ ∪ B ξ via a proof p whose length satisﬁes
Log(p) ≤ ♯( θ) + 1 then Υ will satisfy Good{

1
2

♯( θ) } .

Remark 5.2 The invariant ∗ states short proofs (with lengths ≤ ♯( θ) + 1 ) will

produce at least partially useful deductions, in that their Πξ1 theorems will always satisfy
Good{

1
2

♯( θ) } , irregardless of whether or not θ’s axioms are technically true. (This

makes the study of A-stability very interesting unto itself, apart from its applications in
the current article).
Theorem 5.11 will show the presence of A-stability, alone, is suﬃcient for constructing
self-justifying systems. This will imply every A-stable conﬁguration must contain some
embedded weakness (as every evasion of the Second Incompleteness Theorem always
does). On the other hand, Appendix F will explain how A-stability and its “EA-stable”
cousin (deﬁned later) are both epistemologically interesting. Thus, A-stability has redeeming features.
Definition 5.3 A Generic Conﬁguration ξ will be called E-Stable iﬀ all of the
θ ∈ RE-Class(ξ) satisfy

∗ ∗ . (This construct is the counterpart for Σξ1 sentences of

the Item ∗ in Deﬁnition 5.1.)

** If Υ is a Σξ1 theorem derived from the axiom system θ ∪ B ξ via a proof p

whose length satisﬁes Log(p) ≤ ♯( θ) + 1 then Υ will automatically satisfy
Good{ 21 ⌊ Log(p) ⌋ − 1 } .

(This invariant further implies 8 that Υ will also

satisfy the Good{ 12 ♯( θ) } criteria.)
Remark 5.4 The invariants ∗ and ∗∗ are partially analogous to each other because

both imply that if p is a proof short enough to satisfy Log(p) ≤

their resulting theorem will satisfy Good{

1
2

♯( θ) + 1 then

♯( θ) } . However, there is a distinction

between Deﬁnitions 5.1 and 5.3, as well. This is because the prior section’s Footnote

6 observed that Σξ1 sentences are stronger when they meet a Good( N ) rather than a
Good( ∞ ) threshold, while the reverse is true for Πξ1 sentences. Thus ∗∗ ’s short proofs

p (satisfying Log(p) ≤ ♯( θ) + 1 ) will have the special property that their theorems

Υ will satisfy a “Good{ 12 ⌊ Log(p) ⌋ − 1 } ” constraint that is actually stronger than
their formal Σξ1 statements.

8
This point is easy to conﬁrm when one remembers that Σξ1 sentences Υ have the property
that A < B implies ScopeE (Υ, A) is stronger than ScopeE (Υ, B). It is then obvious that the
Good{ 12 ⌊ Log(p) ⌋ − 1 } criteria implies the validity of Good{ 21 ♯( θ) } for Σξ1 sentences
because the invariant ∗∗ presumes its Σξ1 theorems have proofs p satisfying “ Log(p) ≤ ♯( θ) + 1 ”.

16

The Appendix D will provide four examples of generic conﬁgurations that are either
E-stable or A-stable (or often both). Its most prominent example will be a conﬁguration
ξ ∗ that uses semantic tableaux deduction and recognizes addition as a total function.
Theorem D.4 will imply such systems can be made self-justifying and able to prove Peano
Arithmetic’s Π∗1 theorems.
Three more deﬁnitions are needed to help introduce our ﬁrst theorem
Definition 5.5 A generic conﬁguration ξ will be called EA-stable iﬀ it is both
E-stable and A-stable. (It will thus satisfy both ∗ and ∗ ∗ .)
Our next deﬁnition is related to the fact that many deﬁnitions of consistency are
logically equivalent from the perspective of strong enough logics, but they are often not
provably equivalent from the perspectives of weak logics.
Definition 5.6 Let ξ denote the generic conﬁguration (Lξ , ∆ξ0 , B ξ , d, G), and α be
an axiom system satisfying α ⊇ B ξ . Then α is called Level(kξ ) Consistent when there
exists no proofs from α via d’s deduction method of both a Πξk sentence and of the Σξk

sentence that is its negation
Most of this article will focus on self-justifying systems that recognize their Level(k ξ )
consistency when k equals 0 or 1. Our next deﬁnition will be applied mostly to these
two cases.
Definition 5.7 Given any k ≥ 0, a generic conﬁguration (Lξ , ∆ξ0 , B ξ , d, G) and an

axiom system β ⊃ B ξ , the symbol SelfConsk (β, d) will denote a self-referencing Πξ1

sentence declaring β+SelfConsk (β, d)’s formal Level(kξ ) consistency, as is illustrated
below by the statement

+ . (An encoding for SelfConsk (β, d) will be provided by

Appendix A.)
+

There exists no two proofs (using deduction method d) of both some

Πξk sentence and of the Σξk sentence,

that represents its negation, from the

union of the axiom system β with this added sentence “SelfConsk (β, d) ”
(looking at itself ).
Remark 5.8 We will focus on Deﬁnition 5.7’s SelfConsk (β, d) axiom mostly in the
settings where k = 0 or 1. This is because SelfConsk (β, d) will typically be too strong
for it to generate boundary-case exceptions to the Second Incompleteness Theorem when
k ≥ 2 . It turns out that even when k = 1 , Deﬁnition 5.7’s SelfConsk (β, d) state-

ment will be signiﬁcantly stronger than the axiomatic declaration • used by Section 1’s

SelfRef(β, d) axiom. This is because SelfCons1 (β, d) asserts non-existence of simultane-

ous proofs for a Πξ1 sentence and its negation, while SelfRef(β, d) establishes merely
the non-existence of a proof of 0 = 1.

17

Theorem 5.9 Let ξ denote a generic configuration (Lξ , ∆ξ0 , B ξ , d, G) that is EAstable. Then the corresponding axiom system of B ξ +SelfCons1 (B ξ , d) must satisfy Section 1’s definition of self-justification.
Proof. The justiﬁcation of Theorem 5.9 will be a more elaborate version of Lemma
4.6’s mini-proof. It will replace Deﬁnition 4.5’s Tightness constraint with an EA-stability
requirement. It will also replace SelfRef(β, d)’s “I am consistent” axiom with a stronger
SelfCons1 (β, d) statement.
Our proof will focus on showing B ξ +SelfCons1 (B ξ , d) is consistent (and thus satisﬁes
the subtle Part-ii component of Section 1’s deﬁnition of “Self-Justiﬁcation”). It will be
awkward during our discussion to write repeatedly the expression “ B ξ +SelfCons1 (B ξ , d) ”.
Therefore, “S” will be the abbreviated name for this axiom system. We will also employ
the following notation:
1. PrfS (t, p) will denote that p is a proof of the theorem t from the above
mentioned formalism “ S ” (using ξ ’s deduction method of d ).
2. Neg1 (x, y) will denote that x is the Gödel encoding of a Πξ1 sentence and that
y is a Σξ1 sentence which represents x ’s formal negation.
Appendix A explains how to combine the theory of LinH functions [15, 23, 69] with
[61]’s ﬁxed point methods to provide PrfS (t, p) and Neg1 (x, y) with ∆ξ0 encodings. (A
reader can omit examining Appendix A, if he just accepts this fact.) Thus, (21) can be
viewed 9 in this context as being SelfCons1 (B ξ , d) ’s formalized Πξ1 statement, declaring
the Level(1ξ ) consistency of S:
∀x∀y∀p∀q

¬ { Neg1 (x, y) ∧ PrfS (x, p) ∧ PrfS (y, q) }

(21)

Let Φ denote (21)’s sentence. We will use it to prove Theorem 5.9’s claim that S is
consistent. Our proof will be a proof by contradiction. It will begin with the assumption
that S is inconsistent. This implies Φ is false under the Standard-M model. Hence,
Deﬁnition 4.4 implies
♯( Φ ) < ∞

(22)

Equation (22) thus indicates there exists (p̄, q̄, x̄, ȳ) satisfying (23) (because such a tuple
will be a counter-example to (21)’s assertion). The particular (p, q, x, y) satisfying (23)
9

Our notation convention has the abbreviated formula of “ PrfS (t, p) ” in Equation (21) corresponding
to Appendix A’s “ SubstPrf dβ (n̄, t, p) ” formula, in a context where n speciﬁes the Gödel number of
the expression Γk (g) in Appendix A’s Equation (36) and where the superscript k within this formula
“ Γk (g) ” is set equal to 1. This implies that sentence (21) does assert the Level(1ξ ) consistency of S.
——————————————————-

18

with minimum value for Log{ Max[p, q, x, y] } can then be easily shown 10 to also satisfy

Equation (24).

Neg1 ( x̄ , ȳ ) ∧ PrfS ( x̄ , p̄ ) ∧ PrfS ( ȳ , q̄ )

(23)

Log { Max[ p̄ , q̄ , x̄ , ȳ ] }

(24)

=

♯( Φ ) + 1

We will now use (23) and (24) to bring our proof-by-contradiction to its conclusion.
Let Υ denote the Πξ1 sentence speciﬁed by x̄ . Then ¬ Υ will correspond to the Σξ1

sentence denoted by ȳ . Also, (23) and (24) imply that both Υ and ¬ Υ have proofs
such that the logarithms of their Gödel numbers are bounded by ♯( Φ ) + 1 . These
facts imply that Υ and ¬ Υ both satisfy Good{

1
2

♯( Φ) } under our formalism.

(This is because if we take θ in Deﬁnitions 5.1 and 5.3 to be simply Φ ’s 1-sentence

statement, then the invariants of ∗ and ∗∗ from these two deﬁnitions both impose the

same Good{

1
2

♯( Φ) } constraint on Υ and ¬ Υ .)

It is infeasible, however, for a sentence and its negation to both satisfy the same
goodness constraint. This completes Theorem 5.9’s proof-by-contradiction because the
initial assumption that S was inconsistent has led to an infeasible conclusion.

✷

Our next deﬁnition will help formalize a useful cousin of Theorem 5.9.
Definition 5.10 A Generic Conﬁguration of ξ will be called 0-Stable when every
particular θ ∈ RE-Class(ξ) satisﬁes the invariant of ∗ ∗ ∗. (This invariant is strictly

weaker than its counterparts ∗ and ∗∗ in Deﬁnitions 5.1 and 5.3.)

*** If Υ is a ∆ξ0 theorem derived from the axiom system θ ∪ B ξ via a proof p

whose length satisﬁes Log(p) ≤ ♯( θ) + 1 , then Υ is true under the Standard-M
model.

Theorem 5.11 If the configuration ξ is 0-stable then B ξ +SelfCons0 (B ξ , d) is a selfjustifying formalism. (Appendix C shows this result applies also to E-stable and A-stable
conﬁgurations.)
Theorem 5.11’s proof is similar to Theorem 5.9’s proof. The diﬀerence between these
two propositions is that Theorem 5.11 has reduced SelfCons’s superscript from 1 to 0,
so that its hypothesis can encompass a theoretically broader set of applications. (The
Appendix C summarizes how Theorem 5.9’s proof can be easily modiﬁed to also prove
Theorem 5.11.)
10

Let L denote the minimum value for Log{ Max[p, q, x, y] } for a tuple (p, q, x, y) satisfying Equation (23). Then by deﬁnition, Φ satisﬁes Good(L − 1) but not Good(L). From Deﬁnition 4.4, this
establishes the validity of Equation (24) (because the minimal (p̄, q̄, x̄, ȳ) satisfying sentence (23) has
Log{Max[p̄, q̄, x̄, ȳ]} = L. )

19

Remark 5.12 Theorems 5.9 and 5.11 should clarify the nature of [59]–[68]’s formalisms. This is because proofs-by-contradictions are notorious in the mathematical
literature for being confusing. They should be simpliﬁed whenever possible. This has
been done mainly through Theorem 5.9’s short proof. (It applies to three of Appendix
D’s four examples of generic conﬁgurations, and Theorem 5.11 applies to Appendix D’s
fourth example.) Furthermore, Section 6 will show how more elaborate self-justiﬁcation
systems can verify all Peano Arithmetic’s Πξ1 theorems.

6

Four Further Meta-Theorems

We need one preliminary lemma before exploring how strong self-viewing logics may
become before they cross the inevitable boundary between self-justiﬁcation and inconsistency, implied by Gödel’s Theorem.
Lemma 6.1 Let ξ denote a generic configuration (Lξ , ∆ξ0 , B ξ , d, G) , and θ • denote
an r.e. set of Πξ1 sentences, each of which holds true in the Standard-M model. Let ξ •
denote a 5-tuple that differs from ξ in that its base axiom system is B ξ ∪ θ • (rather than

B ξ ). These conditions imply that ξ • is a generic configuration, and it will satisfy the
following four invariants:
i If ξ is 0-stable then ξ • will also be 0-stable .
ii If ξ is A-stable then ξ • will also be A-stable .
iii If ξ is E-stable then ξ • will also be E-stable .
iv If ξ is EA-stable then ξ • will also be EA-stable .
Lemma 6.1’s proof is fairly straightforward. It has been placed in the Appendix B.

This section will use Lemma 6.1 to prove four meta-theorems that are consequences of
its formalism.
Definition 6.2 Let ξ again denote a generic conﬁguration (Lξ , ∆ξ0 , B ξ , d, G), and
θ denote some r.e. set of Πξ1 sentences (which are not required to be true under the
Standard-M model). For the cases where k is either 0 or 1, the symbol Gξk ( θ ) will
denote the following axiom system:
Gξk ( θ ) = θ ∪ B ξ ∪ SelfConsk { [ θ ∪ B ξ ] , d }

(25)

Also when k = 0 or 1, the function Gξk (which maps θ onto Gξk ( θ ) ) is called Con-

sistency Preserving iﬀ Gξk ( θ ) is assured to be consistent whenever all the sentences
in θ are true under the Standard-M model.
We emphasize consistency preservation is unusual in logic. This is because Gξk ( θ )

comes from adding a self-justifying axiom to an initially consistent formalism B ξ +θ , and
20

the Second Incompleteness Theorem demonstrates that suﬃciently powerful formalisms
are simply incompatible with such an axiom. However, there will be four specialized
paradigms, deﬁned in Appendix D, that are exceptions to this rule. They will be related
to our next result:
Theorem 6.3 The function Gξ1 shall satisfy Definition 6.2’s consistency preservation property when ξ is EA-stable. Likewise the function Gξ0 will be consistency
preserving when ξ is any one of A-stable, E-stable or 0-stable. (Thus in each case,
Gξk ( θ ) will be consistent when all the sentences in θ are true in the Standard-M
model.)
Proof. It will be convenient for our proof to use a dot-style notation, analogous to
Lemma 6.1’s terminology. Thus,
1. θ • denotes any r.e. set of Πξ1 sentences that are each true under the Standard-M
model.
2. ξ • is the tuple ( Lξ , ∆ξ0 , B ξ ∪ θ • , d , G ). (It diﬀers from ξ by replacing ξ ’s base
axiom system of B ξ with B ξ ∪ θ • .)

Part-iv of Lemma 6.1 indicates the EA-stability of ξ implies the EA-stability of ξ • . Moreover Theorem 5.9 applies to all EA-stable conﬁgurations, including ξ • . Thus, Gξ1 ( θ • ) is
consistent because ξ is EA-stable and all of θ • ’s sentences are true in the Standard-M
model. This proves Theorem 6.3’s ﬁrst claim.
An almost identical proof, where Theorem 5.11 simply replaces Theorem 5.9 as the
central self-justifying engine, will corroborate Theorem 6.3’s second claim . Thus, Gξ0
is consistency preserving when ξ is one of A-stable, E-stable or 0-stable.

✷

Remark 6.4 Most generic conﬁgurations ξ will not satisfy Theorem 6.3’s hypothesis because Gξk (θ) will typically be inconsistent, irregardless 11 of whether or not all
of θ ’s axioms are valid under the Standard-M model. The signiﬁcance of Theorem 6.3
is that it shows that some outlying exceptions to this general rule do prevail when ξ
satisﬁes one of Theorem 6.3’s four stability conditions. These exceptions are related to
the 3-page abbreviated philosophical discussion that will appear later in Appendix F.
They will assure that Theorem 6.3’s formalisms of Gξ1 (θ) and Gξ0 (θ) are always consistent
whenever θ ’s axioms are valid in the Standard-M model.
Our next deﬁnition will enable self-justifying formalisms to prove the Πξ1 theorems
of any consistent r.e. axiom system that uses Lξ ’s language.
Definition 6.5 Let ξ denote a generic conﬁguration (Lξ , ∆ξ0 , B ξ , d, G). Let B denote

any recursive axiom system whose language is an extension of Lξ . For an arbitrary
11
Conventional generic conﬁgurations ξ will satisfy the Hilbert-Bernays derivability conditions [16, 15].
Their Gξk (θ) will thus be automatically inconsistent because of a Gödel-like diagonalization argument.

21

deduction method D (which may be possibly diﬀerent from ξ ’s deduction method d ),

ξ
let PrfD
B ( ⌈ Ψ ⌉ , q ) denote a ∆0 formula indicating q is a proof of the theorem Ψ from

axiom system B , using deduction method D . Then the Group-2 Schema for (B, D)
is deﬁned as an inﬁnite set of axioms that includes one instance of (26)’s axiom for each
Πξ1 sentence Ψ.
∀q

{ PrfD
B (⌈Ψ⌉, q)

−→

Ψ }

(26)

Comment about this Notation: The Deﬁnition 6.5 had called (26) a “Group-2
Schema” so as to keep our terminology consistent with [59, 61, 64, 66]’s notation.
Theorem 6.6 Let ξ denote any arbitrary generic configuration, and (B, D) denote

any pair consisting of an axiom system and a deduction method (which, once again, are
allowed to be different from ξ ’s deduction method and axiom system). Then if all of
(B, D)’s Πξ1 theorems are true in the Standard-M model, the following two invariants will

hold:

i If ξ is EA-stable then there will exist an r.e. self-justifying system that can prove
all of (B, D)’s Πξ1 theorems and recognize its own Level( 1ξ ) consistency.
ii Likewise, if ξ is one of A-stable, E-stable or 0-stable, there will exist an r.e. selfjustifying system that can confirm all of (B, D)’s Πξ1 theorems and which can recognize its own Level( 0ξ ) consistency.

Proof. Theorem 6.6 follows from Theorem 6.3. Thus let θ denote the set of all
Πξ1 sentences that are members of Deﬁnition 6.5’s Group-2 schema.

Then every one of

θ ’s Group-2 axioms must be true under the Standard-M model (because the hypothesis
of Theorem 6.6 indicated all of (B, D)’s Πξ1 theorems are true in this model). Hence,
Theorem 6.3 implies:

1. Gξ1 ( θ ) is consistent when ξ is EA-stable.
2. Gξ0 ( θ ) is consistent when ξ is one of A-stable, E-stable or 0-stable.
Since Gξ0 ( θ ) and Gξ1 ( θ ) are self-justifying systems that prove all of (B, D)’s Πξ1 theorems,

Items 1 and 2 will substantiate Theorem 6.6’s two claims. ✷

An awkward aspect of Deﬁnition 6.5’s “Group-2” schema is that it employs an inﬁnite
number of instances of (26)’s Group-2-like axiom sentences. It turns out that this Group2 scheme can be compressed into a single axiom sentence, if one is willing to settle for a
slightly diluted variant of (B, D)’s Πξ1 knowledge. To formalize this concept, the following

notation shall be used:

22

1. Checkξ (t) will denote a ∆ξ0 formula that checks to see whether t represents the
Gödel number of a Πξ1 sentence.
2. Testξ (t, x) will denote any ∆ξ0 formula where (27)’s invariant is true under the
Standard-M model for every Πξ1 sentence Ψ simultaneously. There are inﬁnitely
many diﬀerent ∆ξ0 formulae that can serve as Testξ (t, x) predicates satisfying this
condition. (Example 6.7 will illustrate one such encoding of a Testξ (t, x) predicate.)
Ψ

←→

∀ x Testξ ( ⌈ Ψ ⌉ , x )

(27)

The expression (28) will be called a Global Simulation Sentence for representing
(B, D) via ξ . Its Testξ (t, x) clause essentially allows ξ to simulate the Πξ1 knowledge of

(B, D)’s set of theorems.

ξ
∀ t ∀ q ∀ x { [ PrfD
B (t, q) ∧ Check (t) ]

−→

Testξ (t, x)

}

(28)

Example 6.7 For any generic conﬁguration ξ = (Lξ , ∆ξ0 , B ξ , d, G), let NegPrfξ (t, x)
denote a ∆ξ0 formula specifying that t is a Πξ1 sentence and that x is a proof under d ’s
deduction method of the Σξ1 sentence that represents t ’s negation. Also, let Testξ0 (t, x)
be deﬁned as follow:
Testξ0 (t, x)

=def

¬ NegPrfξ (t, x)

(29)

For each Πξ1 sentence Ψ, it is easy to verify 12 that the statement (30) is true under the
Standard-M model.
Ψ

←→

∀ x Testξ0 ( ⌈ Ψ ⌉ , x )

(30)

The latter implies that (31) is a global simulation sentence for (B, D).
ξ
∀ t ∀ q ∀ x { [ PrfD
B (t, q) ∧ Check (t) ]

−→

Testξ0 (t, x) }

(31)

We emphasize that there are countably inﬁnite diﬀerent examples of Testξi (t, x) predicates that generate global simulation sentences and that statement (31) illustrates only
one such example.
Definition 6.8 Let (B, D) denote any ordered pair whose set of Πξ1 theorems are

true under the Standard-M model. Let Testξ1 , Testξ2 , Testξ3 .... denote the set of
∆ξ0 formulae where statement (27) is true under the Standard-M model for every Πξ1
sentences Ψ. Then TestListξ will denote a list of all these Testξi predicates. Also for

each Testξj formula in TestListξ , the symbol GlobSimD
B (ξ, j) will denote the special
version of (28)’s global simulation formalism that employs Testξj ’s machinery.
Part-3 of Deﬁnition 3.4 indicated that ξ ’s base axiom system is “ Σξ1 complete”. (It is thus able
to prove all Σξ1 sentences that are true in the true in Standard-M model, and it will likewise refute all
Πξ1 sentences that are false.) The statement (29) then immediately implies that (30) must be true under
the Standard-M model for every Πξ1 sentence Ψ .
12

23

Remark 6.9 A comparison between Deﬁnition 6.5’s Group-2 schema with 6.8’s
global simulation sentences will reveal neither is strictly better than the other. Both
have their own separate advantages. Thus, the attractive aspect about Deﬁnition 6.8’s
GlobSimD
B (ξ, j) sentence is that it is a ﬁnite-sized object that can simulate the inﬁnite
set of axioms associated with Deﬁnition 6.5’s Group-2 schema. The accompanying drawback 13 of a global simulation sentence is that the union of it with the base-axiom system
B ξ will typically be inadequate to prove every Πξ1 sentence that is a theorem of (B, D).
Instead, in a context where Ψ is a Πξ1 theorem of (B, D), the sentence GlobSimD
B (ξ, j)
will usually provide only enough fragmented information to prove the statement (32)
(which is equivalent to Ψ under the Standard-M model).
∀ x Testξj ( ⌈ Ψ ⌉ , x )

(32)

While (32) may be insuﬃcient to prove Ψ from B ξ , it still (according to the statement
(27) ) has the desired property of being equivalent to Ψ under the Standard-M model.
(This means that the knowledge of (32)’s truth is helpful, even if it is unknown from
B ξ ’s perspective to be equivalent to Ψ . )
Our prior articles [59, 61, 64, 66] did not use Deﬁnition 6.8’s global simulation formalism. They employed, instead, Deﬁnition 6.5’s Group-2 axiom schema. Theorem 6.10 will
be the analog of Theorem 6.6 for global simulation. It will be useful when one desires to
compress all the information held by a Group-2 schema into a single ﬁnite-sized object.
Theorem 6.10 Let ξ denote the generic configuration (Lξ , ∆ξ0 , B ξ , d, G), B denote

a recursively enumerable axiom system and D denote any deduction method (which can
be different than ξ ’s deduction method d ) . Suppose that all the Πξ1 theorems generated

by ( B , D ) are true under the Standard-M model. Then the following invariants do hold:
i If ξ is EA-stable then for each j there exists a finitized extension

βj of
ξ
ξ
B that recognizes its Level(1 ) self-consistency and which contains the sentence
GlobSimD
B (ξ, j).

ii Likewise for each j, if ξ is E-stable, A-stable or 0-stable then there exists a finitized extension βj of B ξ that recognizes its Level(0ξ ) self-consistency and which
contains the sentence GlobSimD
B (ξ, j).
Proof: Let θ denote the 1-sentence R-View of “GlobSimD
B (ξ, j)” formalized by
Deﬁnition 6.8,

and let βj1

and βj0

denote

B ξ ∪ θ + SelfCons1 ( B ξ ∪ θ )

and

The chief diﬃculty arises essentially because a Πξ1 theorem of (B, D) may contain an arbitrarily long
combination of bounded universal and bounded existential quantiﬁers. Thus, some generic conﬁgurations
will have base axiom systems B ξ that are so weak that their combination with (28)’s Global Simulation
Sentence is insuﬃcient to prove the validity of (27)’s equivalence statement for all Πξ1 sentences Ψ
simultaneously. In particular, such proofs will often be infeasible when Ψ ’s sequence of bounded quantiﬁes
has a length greatly exceeding the length of the Gödel encoding for (28)’s global simulation statement.
13

24

B ξ ∪ θ + SelfCons0 ( B ξ ∪ θ ) , respectively. These axiom systems correspond to the

objects that Deﬁnition 6.2 had called Gξ1 (θ) and Gξ0 (θ).

Theorem 6.10’s hypothesis indicates all the Πξ1 theorems of (B, D) are true under the

Standard-M model. Thus, it follows that θ is also true in the Standard-M model. Hence
Theorem 6.3 implies that βj1 = Gξ1 (θ) is a consistent system satisfying Theorem 6.10’s

claim (i). Likewise, Theorem 6.3 implies βj0 = Gξ0 (θ) satisﬁes Theorem 6.10’s second
claim.

✷

Remark 6.11 Theorems 6.6 and 6.10 raise a fascinating question: Is the trade-off
between these formalisms needed? That is, can self-justifying systems use only a a ﬁnite
number of added axioms beyond those lying in ξ ’s base system of B ξ and also duplicate
all (B, D)’s Πξ1 theorems in a pure sense (i.e. without simulation) ? We will return to

this topic in Appendix G.

REFLECTION PARADIGMS : Our last goal is to show how self-justifying
systems support unusually strong reﬂection principles. Let Reﬂectα,d ( Ψ ) denote (33)’s
statement when Ψ is a sentence with Gödel number ⌈ Ψ ⌉ , and (α, d) denotes an

axiom system and deduction method.
∀p

[ Prfα,d ( ⌈ Ψ ⌉ , p )

⇒

Ψ ]

(33)

Löb’s Theorem [15, 25, 42] implies that conventional systems (α, d) , possessing at least
Peano Arithmetic’s strength, are unable to prove Reﬂectα,d ( Ψ ) except for in the
degenerate cases where they can prove Ψ.
Moreover, it is easy to generalize Löb’s Theorem (via say [61]’s Theorem 7.2) so that
a wide class of formalisms α , weaker than Peano Arithmetic, are also unable to prove
Reﬂectα,d ( Ψ ) for all Πξ1 sentences Ψ simultaneously.
The intuition behind this generalization is quite simple. Let ✵ denote a Πξ1 encoding
for the classic Gödel sentence declaring:

“ There is no proof of me from the axiom

system α using d ’s deduction method”. Then [61]’s Theorem 7.2 uses a very routine
diagonalization argument to show most formalisms α will be inconsistent if they prove
Reﬂectα,d ( ✵ )’s statement.
Our next theorem will show, surprisingly, that the preceding limitation is much less
stringent than it may initially appear to be. This is because Level( 1ξ ) self-justifying
axiom systems are capable of proving very close analogs to (33)’s impermissible

25

reﬂection principle, using a “translational” methodology.
Thus, let T denote an algorithm that maps a Πξ1 sentence Ψ onto a “translated”
sentence ΨT that is equivalent to Ψ under the Standard-M model and which is also
written in a Πξ1 format. (See footnote14 for why it is absolutely imperative that both
these requirements be included in T ’s deﬁnition.) Also, let ReﬂectTα,d ( Ψ ) denote the
translational modiﬁcation of (33)’s reﬂection principle that replaces Ψ with ΨT .
∀ p [ Prfα,d ( ⌈ Ψ ⌉ , p )

⇒

ΨT ]

(34)

Theorem 6.12 Let ξ denote the EA-stable configuration of (Lξ , ∆ξ0 , B ξ , d, G), and
let α = B ξ + SelfCons1 ( B ξ ) denote ξ ’s corresponding Level(1) self-justifying axiom
system. Then there will exist a translation methodology T

where α can prove the

validity of (34) for all its Πξ1 sentences simultaneously.
Proof: Let us use Example 6.7’s notation. It observed that Ψ ’s Πξ1 statement was
equivalent under the Standard-M model to “ ∀ x Testξ0 ( ⌈ Ψ ⌉ , x )”. Thus, let us view T
as being a mapping of the ﬁrst sentence onto the second.

Our proof of Theorem 6.12 will next use the following observations:
1. The non-existence of a proof of ¬ Ψ from B ξ + SelfCons1 ( B ξ ) trivially implies
the non-existence of a proof of the same theorem from B ξ (because the latter
axiom system is simply a subset of the former).
2. Moreover, Example 6.7’s notation treats “ ∀ x Testξ0 ( ⌈ Ψ ⌉ , x )” as being equivalent
to the declaration that no proof of ¬ Ψ from B ξ exists.

Hence, α can prove (34)’s statement by noting that p ’s proof of a Πξ1 sentence Ψ
implies (via α ’s SelfCons1 axiom) the non-existence of a proof of ¬ Ψ , which (via

Items 1 and 2) implies “ ∀ x Testξ0 ( ⌈ Ψ ⌉ , x )”
Remark 6.13 :

✷.

Theorem 6.12 and the statement (34)’s Translational Reﬂection

Principle may possibly be useful devices in unraveling some of the mystery that has
enshrouded Gödel’s Second Incompleteness Theorem, since its inception. This is partly
because Gödel was explicitly uncertain about the generality of the Second Incompleteness
Theorem in his initial 1931 seminal paper [14] about this subject. His centennial paper
about Incompleteness thus included the following quite poignant caveat:
Part-3 of Deﬁnition 3.4 indicated that generic conﬁgurations are Σξ1 complete. Our requirement
that ΨT must have a Πξ1 format thus causes T to gain much added meaning. This is because the
axiom system B ξ will then automatically disprove ΨT whenever it is false under the Standard-M
model. (Thus, T ’s mapping of Ψ onto ΨT gains much signiﬁcance when Ψ and ΨT do rest on the
same Πξ1 level of the arithmetic hierarchy.)
14

26

•

: “It must be expressly noted that Theorem XI (i.e the Second Incom-

pleteness Theorem) represents no contradiction of the formalistic standpoint
of Hilbert. For this standpoint presupposes only the existence of a consistency proof by ﬁnite means, and there might conceivably be finite proofs which
cannot be stated in ... ”
Some of the issues that troubled Gödel in the statement • can perhaps be partially

resolved if one compares the reﬂection principles of sentences (33) and (34). This is
because (33) is probably unnecessary to explain how thinking beings can appreciate
their Πξ1 theorems when Theorem 6.12’s specialized logics can, instead, use the fact

that its Πξ1 sentences satisfy at least (34)’s modiﬁed reﬂection principle. Thus, some
of the mystery surrounding the Second Incompleteness Eﬀect can be clariﬁed when one
notices that (34)’s translational reﬂection princible is a useful precept, that was shown
by Theorem 6.12 to be technically unrelated to Gödel’s observation that no reasonable
formalism can prove (33)’s purist principle for all Πξ1 sentences simultaneously.
Remark 6.14 Theorem 6.12 is also signiﬁcant because it explains how its specialized
logics can grapple with a Πξ1 encoded Gödel sentence ✵ which asserts “There is no
proof of me”. This issue is challenging because routine constructions, such as [61]’s
Theorem 7.2, demonstrate that no natural logic can verify statement (33)’s validity for
all Πξ1 sentences Ψ (on account of the well-known syllogism posed by ✵’s Gödel
sentence). Theorem 6.12 constructs, however, a reply to this challenge. This is because
its self-justifying systems do surprisingly prove, without diﬃculty 15 , the validity of (34)’s
translated modification of (33)’s unobtainable Πξ1 styled variant of a reﬂection principle.
Remark 6.15 We encourage the reader to examine the work of Beklemishev, KreiselTakeuti and Verbrugge-Visser [5, 6, 7, 24, 52, 56] to see alternative reﬂection principles
and their uses. (The constraint on proof-length, by Verbrugge-Visser, is certainly one
alternative to Theorem 6.12’s machinery. Likewise, Kreisel-Takeuti’s Second Order Logic
CFA reﬂection is another alternative, although it will not 16 generalize to ﬁrst-order logics.) One complicating aspect of our Theorem 6.12’s reﬂection method is that Appendix
E proves it becomes inoperable when an axiom system is suﬃciently conventional to satisfy Gödel’s Second Incompleteness Theorem. In essence, Theorem 6.12’s translational
15

Since Ψ and ΨT are equivalent under the Standard-M Model but not also equivalent from the
perspective of the system α = B ξ + SelfCons1 ( B ξ ), the conventional contradictions, produced by
(33)’s reﬂection principle, disappear when it is replaced by (34). (Thus, there is no danger that α could
use (34)’s reﬂection principle to prove an analog of ✵ ’s forbidden Gödel sentence.)
——————————————————Kreisel-Takeuti indicate on page 25 of [24] that CFA’s reﬂection principle for a ﬁrst order formula
“A” infers the validity of only the relativized formula “ AN ” from A’s proof. Also, their proof predicate
is similarily relativized. Thus CFA’s second-order logic reﬂection principle, while fascinating, does not
generalize to ﬁrst-order logic environments.
16

27

reﬂection principle is a specialized methodology, intended for logics using Deﬁnition 5.7’s
Level(1) style of self-justiﬁcation.
Remark 6.16 The preceding discussion clearly shows self-justifying logics are tempting. At the same time, it is necessary to be very cautious because there are also two
fundamental barriers limiting such results:
a The ﬁrst is the Theorem 2.1 arising from the joint work of Pudlák, Solovay, Nelson and Wilkie-Paris [26, 33, 44, 58]. It showed no reasonable system recognizing
successor as a total function can verify its own Hilbert consistency. Also, Willard
[62, 67] established analogous results under semantic tableaux consistency for systems recognizing multiplication as a total function. Thus, each eﬀort to evade the
Second Incompleteness Theorem must encounter robust barriers.
b A second issue is that Deﬁnition 5.7’s “SelfCons” “I am consistent” axiom sentence is
less than ideal because it causes axiom systems to produce essentially a 1-line proof
of their own consistency. Such an excessively compressed proof corresponds more
closely to an axiom system formulating an instinctive faith in its own consistency
(rather than it supporting a full-length proof-justiﬁcation of this fact).
Part of the reason self-justifying systems are of interest, despite these limitations, is that
they illustrate how some formalisms are compatible with at least an instinctive faith in
their own self-consistency. (This compatibility issue is non-trivial because Item (a) implies there are many circumstances where a generalization of the Second Incompleteness
Theorem will make it infeasible for a formalism to satisfy both Parts (i) and (ii) of Section 1’s deﬁnition of Self-Justiﬁcation.) Moreover, three of Appendix D’s four sample
self-justifying conﬁgurations, called ξ ∗ , ξ ∗∗ and ξ R , will be Type-A systems that recognize addition as a total function. These conﬁgurations will thus possess the following
three signiﬁcant ﬁnitized features:
1. They will be able to construct the entire inﬁnite set of integers by finite means
because they recognize addition as a total function.
2. For any r.e. logical conﬁguration (B, D), it will be possible to develop a 1-sentence

finitized extension for the base axiom systems of any of the conﬁgurations of ξ ∗ ,

ξ ∗∗ and ξ R , which deploy (28)’s Global Simulation Sentence to simulate the
Πξ1 knowledge of (B, D). This means that some fully ﬁnite-sized extensions of the
base-formalisms of ξ ∗ , ξ ∗∗ and ξ R will contain a non-trivial amount of Πξ1
styled knowledge, since (B, D) can correspond to, say, Peano Arithmetic.
3. The key point is that a 1-sentence extension of an axiom system containing features
(1) and (2) can formalize how a logic can possess an instinctive faith in its own
28

consistency via Theorem 6.10’s explicitly finitized structure. (Moreover, Theorem
6.12’s Translational Reﬂection Principle is applicable to Appendix D’s generic conﬁgurations of ξ ∗ and ξ ∗∗ . It will thus imply that their single finitized Level-1
self-justifying axioms enable them to prove an infinite number of incarnations of
(34)’s translational reﬂection principle, where each Π∗1 sentence Ψ is mapped onto
one such unique instance.)
The contrast between Items 1-3’s positive remarks about “ﬁnitized” cogitation with
Items (a) and (b)’s opposing comments is obviously formidable. It is clearly preferable
to view these positive results cautiously and treat them as being no more than boundarycase exceptions to the Second Incompleteness Theorem. The essential reason why these
exceptions are of interest is that Gödel’s famous centennial paper has implicitly raised
the following puzzling issue:
# How is it that Human Beings manage to muster the physical drive to
think (and prove theorems) when the many generalizations of Gödel’s Second
Incompleteness Theorem assert conventional logics lack knowledge of their
own consistency?
There will, of course, never be any perfect answer to the puzzle posed by # because
philosophical paradoxes and ironical dilemmas never yield perfect answers. However,
part of an imperfect answer to # is that Items 1-3 reply to Challenges (a) and (b) by
formalizing how a thinking being can muster an approximate partial instinctive faith in its
own self-consistency. (Moreover, the tight contrast between various generalizations of the
Second Incompleteness Theorem [1, 3, 8, 10, 15, 16, 21, 25, 33, 37, 44, 46, 58, 62, 63, 67]
with the self-justifying systems appearing in Appendixes D and G suggests that these
come close to being maximal forms of feasible results.)
Our remaining discussion will consist of four optional sections, called Appendixes D,
E, F and G, which can be skimmed, omitted or examined in any order the reader prefers.
A summary of their contents is given below:
I The Appendix D provides four examples of generic conﬁgurations that utilize Theorems 5.9, 5.11, 6.3, 6.6 and 6.10. Its most prominent examples involve Equation (2)’s Type-A axiom systems where the deduction method is either semantic
tableaux or a modiﬁed version of tableaux that permits a modus ponens rule for
Πξ1 and Σξ1 sentences.
II The Appendix E introduces a generalization of the Second Incompleteness Theorem
which shows that Theorem 6.12’s Translational Reﬂection Principle applies only to
self-justifying logics. (It is thus fully inoperative for conventional logics. This may
explain why Theorem 6.12’s self-justifying systems are an interesting topic.)
29

III The Appendix F diﬀers from the rest of this paper by having a philosophical slant.
It will oﬀer a 3-page summary about why we suspect Theorem 6.3’s self-justiﬁcation
formalism and Remark 6.16’s notion of “instinctive faith” are useful.
IV The Appendix G introduces a “Bracedξ (Φ, j)” construct and two new theorems
that hybridize the methodologies of Theorems 6.6 and 6.10. These results will
improve upon Theorem 6.6 because their self-justifying systems contain only a
ﬁnite number of axiom-sentences beyond those lying in ξ ’s base formalism of
B ξ . They will improve upon Theorem 6.10 because they can prove the important
Bracedξ (Φ, j) subset of (B, D)’s Πξ1 theorems in a full sense (rather than in Re-

mark 6.9’s weaker simulated respect). Appendix G’s results are useful because for
arbitrary k and for any of Appendix D’s four sample conﬁgurations, every Πξ1 the-

orem of (B, D) containing k or fewer bounded and unbounded quantiﬁers will be

proven by its Theorem G.3 to be self-justifying in an undiluted pure sense. (This
is because each such Πξ1 sentence, with fewer than k quantiﬁers, will lie in some
ﬁxed Bracedξ (Φ, j) set — where solely the value of k determines the values for
Φ and j . )
It is probably desirable to concentrate primarily on Theorems 5.9, 5.11, 6.3, 6.6, 6.10
and 6.12 during one’s ﬁrst reading of this paper. This is because Appendixes A-G are

less central than these core theorems, although their material does add several useful
further perspectives to this subject.

7. Concluding Remarks
The research in this article has been a continuation of our prior research [59]-[68] that
simultaneously has simpliﬁed, uniﬁed and extended the prior results. It has explored
self-justiﬁcation with a 3-part approach where:
1. Sections 4 and 5 introduced three diﬀerent stem components that can be used to
generate self-justifying systems. (These are the relatively simple Lemma 4.6 and
the mathematically more sophisticated Theorems 5.9 and 5.11.)
2. Section 6 and Appendix G then generalized our initial stem-like theorems in the
six diﬀerent directions formalized by Theorem 6.3, 6.6, 6.10, 6.12, G.2 and G.3
3. Appendix D subsequently provided four examples of generic conﬁgurations that
are applications of Section 6’s results.
This 3-part approach is very diﬀerent from the methods used in our prior articles [59, 64,
66, 68]. The latter examined particular isolated applications in thorough detail (rather
30

than compartmentalize and separate the analysis into three stages). The virtue of this
3-stage analysis is it leads to many new theorems, in addition to unifying our prior
results.
It is desirable to categorize the maximal generality and strongest form of boundarycase exceptions for the Second Incompleteness Theorem that are feasible because Gödel’s
centennial discovery beckons the scholarly community to sharpen their understanding of
his 1931 landmark discovery, that has fundamentally reshaped mathematics.
It should be emphasized that our over-all research in [59] – [68] has spent an approximately equal eﬀort in exploring generalizations of the Second Incompleteness Theorem
[62, 63, 66, 67] and in examining its viable boundary-case exceptions [59, 61, 64, 65, 66, 68]
(although the current article focused on the latter topic). This is because the Second
Incompleteness Theorem is a starkly robust result that imposes sharp limits on how
strong self-justifying systems may become.
Finally, we encourage the reader to take another brief glance at Remarks 6.13 – 6.16.
They oﬀer a brief summary of both the strengths and limitations of our chief results.
They also explain how Theorem 6.12’s reﬂection principle for Πξ1 styled theorems is a
very unexpected result.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS: I thank Bradley Armour-Garb, Seth Chaiken and
Kenneth W. Regan for many useful suggestions about how to improve the presentation
style of some earlier drafts of this article. As was noted in the text of this article, some
of my research during the last 17 years was inﬂuenced by some private communications
that I had with Robert M. Solovay in 1994 and Leszek Kolodziejczy in 2005.

31

Appendix A: The Πξ1 encoding for SelfConsk (β, d)
This appendix will summarize how to formalize a Πξ1 encoding for Deﬁnition 5.7’s
SelfConsk (β, d) predicate. It will use the following notation:
1. Negk (x, y), will denote a ∆ξ0 formula indicating that x is the Gödel number of a
Πξk sentence and that y represents the Σξk sentence which is its logical negation.
2. Prf dβ ( t , p ) will denote a formula designating that p is a proof of theorem t
from the axiom system β using the deduction method d.
3. ExPrf dβ ( h , t , p ) will denote that p is a proof (using d’s deduction method) of a
theorem t from the union of the axiom system β with the added sentence whose
Gödel number equals h .
4. Subst ( g , h ) will denote Gödel’s substitution formula — which yields TRUE when
g is an encoding of a formula and h encodes a sentence that replaces all occurrence
of free variables in g with a term of ḡ (that speciﬁes g’s Gödel number).
5. SubstPrf dβ ( g , t , p ) will denote the hybridization of Items 3 and 4 that yields a
Boolean value of TRUE when there exists an integer h satisfying Subst ( g , h )
and ExPrf dβ ( h , t , p ).
It is easy to apply [61]’s methodologies to conﬁrm Items 1-5 can be encoded as
∆ξ0 formulae.

Thus, Appendixes C and D of [61] explained how the theory of LinH

functions [15, 23, 69] implied there existed ∆0 encodings for formulae 1-4, and these
∆0 encodings can be easily rewritten 17 as ∆ξ0 expressions. Equation (35) uses this
information to formulate a ∆ξ0 encoding for SubstPrf dβ (g, t, p)’s graph. It is equivalent
to “ ∃ h { Subst(g, h) ∧ ExPrf dβ (h, t, p) } ”,

but Equation (35) is written in a ∆ξ0

format — unlike the quoted expression.
Prf dβ ( t , p )

∨

∃ h ≤ p { Subst ( g , h ) ∧ ExPrf dβ ( h , t , p ) }

(35)

Using (35)’s ∆ξ0 encoding for SubstPrf dβ (g, t, p), it is easy to encode SelfConsk (β, d)
as a Πξ1 axiom-sentence. Thus, let Γk (g) denote (36)’s formula, and let n̄ denote Γ(g)’s
Gödel number.
∀x∀y∀p∀q

¬ { Negk (x, y) ∧ SubstPrf dβ (g, x, p) ∧ SubstPrf dβ (g, y, q) }

(36)

Then “ Γk ( n̄ ) ” is a Πξ1 encoding for SelfConsk (β, d)’s formalization of the statement
+ from Deﬁnition 5.7. Thus, Γk ( n̄ ) is encoded is as follows:
∀x∀y∀p∀q

¬ { Negk (x, y) ∧ SubstPrf dβ (n̄, x, p) ∧ SubstPrf dβ (n̄, y, q) }

(37)

This rewriting of conventional ∆0 formulae into a ∆ξ0 format is possible because Part 2 of Deﬁnition 3.4 indicated that two 3-way predicates of Add(x, y, z) and Mult(x, y, z) do encode addition and
multiplication in a ∆ξ0 styled form.
17

32

Reminder about Equation (37) : This sentence’s deﬁnition for SelfConsk (β, d)
does not assure (37) is true under the Standard-M model. Indeed for nearly all (β, d),
it will be false when k ≥ 2. This is the reason that the study of SelfConsk (β, d), under
Theorems 5.9 and 5.11, has focused on the cases where k equals 0 or 1. Moreover, the

preceding construction did assure that SelfConsk (β, d) had a Πξ1 encoding because such
an “I am consistent” axiom carries more meaning than a Πξ2 encoded axiom.

Appendix B: The Proof of Lemma 6.1
Lemma 6.1 is a crucial interim step used to verify each of Theorems 6.3, 6.6 and 6.10.
Its proof will employ the following three straightforward observations:
Fact B.1 Lemma 6.1’s hypothesis implies that ξ • is a generic conﬁguration. (This is
because it speciﬁed that ξ was a generic conﬁguration and that all the Πξ1 sentences
of θ • were true in the Standard-M model. Thus, ξ • must also be a generic
conﬁguration.)
Fact B.2 The associative identity of θ ∪ (θ • ∪ B ξ ) = ( θ ∪ θ • ) ∪ B ξ obviously holds.
It implies a sentence Υ is a theorem of θ ∪ (θ • ∪ B ξ ) if and only if it is a theorem

of ( θ ∪ θ • ) ∪ B ξ .

Fact B.3 Lemma 6.1’s hypothesis directly 18 implies ♯( θ) = ♯( θ • ∪ θ).
The justiﬁcation of claims (i)-(iv) are consequences of Facts B.1 through B.3. We
will provide a detailed proof of only Claim (i) here because all four claims have similar
proofs.
Proof of Claim (i) : The hypothesis of Claim (i) indicated that ξ was 0-stable.
Therefore, it satisﬁes Deﬁnition 5.10’s invariant of ∗ ∗ ∗ . In a context where φ is a

variable designating a r.e. set of Πξ1 sentences and Υ is a variable corresponding to a
∆ξ0 sentence, the invariant ∗ ∗ ∗ can be rewritten in a quasi-rigorous form as :
∀φ ∀Υ
∀ p

the below statement, called Ψ1 (φ, Υ), is true

(38)

If Υ is a ∆ξ0 theorem derived from the axiom system φ ∪ B ξ via a

proof p , whose length satisﬁes Log(p) ≤ ♯( φ ) + 1 , then Υ is true under
the Standard-M model.

Since (38)’s universally quantiﬁed variable φ can designate any r.e. set of Πξ1 sentences,
it may designate the object “ θ ∪ θ • ”, where θ • is the r.e. set of Πξ1 sentences deﬁned
18

The identity of ♯( θ• ) = ∞ must be true because the hypothesis of Lemma 6.1 indicated
that all the Πξ1 sentences in θ• are true under the Standard-M model. By Deﬁnition 4.4, this implies
♯( θ ) = ♯( θ• ∪ θ ) .

33

by Lemma 6.1’s hypothesis (and θ is any second r.e. set of sentences). Thus, (38)
directly implies :
∀ θ ∀Υ

the below statement, called Ψ2 (θ, Υ), is true

(39)

∀ p If Υ is a ∆ξ0 theorem derived from the axiom system ( θ ∪ θ • ) ∪ B ξ

via a proof p , whose length satisﬁes Log(p) ≤ ♯( θ ∪ θ • ) + 1, then Υ is

true under Standard-M.

Facts B.2 and B.3 enable one to simplify (39)’s terms of ( θ ∪ θ • ) ∪ B ξ and ♯( ( θ ∪ θ • ) )
and thus to derive (40) as a consequence.
∀ θ ∀Υ

the below statement, called Ψ3 (θ, Υ), is true

(40)

∀ p If Υ is a ∆ξ0 theorem derived from axiom system θ ∪ ( θ • ∪ B ξ ) via

a proof p, whose length satisﬁes Log(p) ≤ ♯( θ) + 1, then Υ is true under
the Standard-M model.

We will now use Fact B.1’s observation that ξ • is a generic conﬁguration. The sentence
(40) indicates this conﬁguration satisﬁes Deﬁnition 5.10’s invariant of ∗ ∗ ∗. Hence, ξ • is

0-stable. ✷

Brief Comments about the Justifications of Claims (ii)-(iv): This appendix
has omitted proving (ii)-(iv) for the sake of brevity. Their proofs are similar to Claim
(i)’s proof. For instance, Claim (ii)’s proof diﬀers from Claim (i)’s proof by having the
0-stability invariant in ∗ ∗ ∗ replaced by the A-stability invariant of ∗ . This will cause

the analogs of (38) – (40) to undergo the following two simple changes under Claim (ii)’s
proof :

1. Υ will represent a Πξ1 (rather than a ∆ξ0 ) theorem-statement under the revised
versions of Ψ1 , Ψ2 and Ψ3 used in Claim (ii)’s proof
2. The requirement (in sentences (38)-(40) of Claim i’s proof) that Υ be true in the
Standard model is changed to the stipulation that Υ satisﬁes the Good{ 12 ♯( φ) }

and Good{ 21 ♯( θ)} conditions under the revised forms of Ψ1 , Ψ2 and Ψ3 used to

prove Claim (ii).
Other minor adjustments in Claim (i)’s proof shall verify Claims iii and iv.

34

Appendix C: The Proof of Theorem 5.11
Our proof of Theorem 5.11 is a straightforward modiﬁcation of Theorem 5.9’s proof. It
will be divided into two lemmas.
Lemma C.1. Every generic configuration that is either E-stable or A-stable will
automatically satisfy Definition 5.10’s 0-stability condition.
Proof.

Lemma C.1 is a consequence of the “Special Note” appearing at the end

of Deﬁnition 4.2. For every N ≥ 0, it indicated that if Υ is a ∆ξ0

sentence then

ScopeE (Υ, N ) is equivalent to Υ . This implies (via Deﬁnition 4.3) that if Υ is a
Good(N) ∆ξ0 formula then ScopeE (Υ, N ) is automatically true under the Standard-M
model.
The latter observation makes it easy to conﬁrm Lemma C.1. This is because every

∆ξ0 sentence is a Πξ1 and Σξ1 statement.
and ∗ ∗

Hence, the application of the invariants

∗

from Deﬁnitions 5.1 and 5.3, in the degenerate case where Υ is a ∆ξ0 theorem,

corroborates Lemma C.1’s claim (by showing that Deﬁnition 5.10’s invariant of ∗ ∗ ∗
does hold).

✷

The remainder of this appendix will focus on Deﬁnition 5.10’s 0-stability condition.
(This is suﬃcient to justify Theorem 5.11 because Lemma C.1 showed all E-stable and
A-stable conﬁgurations are 0-stable.)
Lemma C.2. Let ξ denote a generic configuration (Lξ , ∆ξ0 , B ξ , d, G) that is 0Stable. Then the axiom system of B ξ +SelfCons0 (B ξ , d) will be consistent (and hence
self-justifying).
Proof: It will be awkward to write repeatedly the expression “ B ξ +SelfCons0 (B ξ , d) ”
during our proof. Therefore, H will be an abbreviated name for this system. Our justiﬁcation of Lemma C.2, is similar to Theorem 5.9’s proof, except it replaces a Level(1ξ )
form of self-justiﬁcation with a Level(0ξ ). It will thus be abbreviated and use the following notation:
1. PrfH (t, p) is a ∆ξ0 formula specifying p is a proof of the theorem t from the
axiom system H (using ξ ’s deduction method of d ).
2. Neg0 (x, y) is a ∆ξ0 formula indicating x is the Gödel encoding of a ∆ξ0 sentence
and y is a ∆ξ0 sentence representing x ’s negation.
Expression (41) denotes H ’s Level(0ξ ) self-justiﬁcation axiom. It is encoded using
Appendix A’s methodology, similar to its counterpart used in Theorem 5.9’s proof (i.e.
Equation (21) ).
∀x∀y∀p∀q

¬ { Neg0 (x, y) ∧ PrfH (x, p) ∧ PrfH (y, q) }

35

(41)

Our proof of Lemma C.2 will be a proof by contradiction. It will thus begin with the
contrary assumption that H is inconsistent and have Φ denote (41)’s sentence. The
inconsistency of H implies that Φ is false under the Standard-M model. Hence via
Deﬁnition 4.4, we get:
♯( Φ ) < ∞

(42)

Equation (42) implies there exists a tuple (p̄, q̄, x̄, ȳ) satisfying (43). (This is because such
a (p̄, q̄, x̄, ȳ) corroborates (42)’s implication that a counter-example to (41)’s sentence
does exist.)
Neg0 ( x̄ , ȳ ) ∧ PrfH ( x̄ , p̄ ) ∧ PrfH ( ȳ , q̄ )

(43)

The (p, q, x, y) satisfying (43) with minimum value for Log{ Max[p, q, x, y] } will addition-

ally satisfy (44). (This observation follows from the analog of the Footnote 10 appearing
in Theorem 5.9’s proof. Thus, Section 5’s Equations of (23) and (24) are the analogs of
the current Equations (43) and (44). The Footnote 10 showed the particular (p, q, x, y)
satisfying (23) with minimum value for Log{ Max[p, q, x, y] } satisﬁed (24). By the same
reasoning, the minimal (p̄, q̄, x̄, ȳ) satisfying (43) will satisfy (44).)
Log { Max[ p̄ , q̄ , x̄ , ȳ ] }

=

♯( Φ ) + 1

(44)

Equations (43) and (44) shall bring Lemma C.2’s proof-by-contradiction to its soughtafter end. Thus, let Υ denote the ∆ξ0 sentence speciﬁed by x̄ . Then ¬ Υ corresponds

to the ∆ξ0 sentence denoted by ȳ . Equation (44) indicates that both Υ and ¬ Υ have

proofs such that the logarithms of their Gödel numbers are bounded by
Using Deﬁnition 5.10’s invariant of

∗∗∗

♯( Φ ) + 1 .

, these facts establish 19 that both

Υ and

¬ Υ are true under the Standard-M model.

But it is impossible for a sentence and its negation to be both true. This ﬁnishes

Lemma C.2’s proof because the temporary assumption that H was inconsistent has led
to a contradiction.

✷

Theorem 5.11 is a consequence of the Lemmas C.1 and C.2 because Lemma C.2’s formalism generalizes to all E-stable and A-stable conﬁgurations via Lemma C.1’s reduction
methodology.

19

To apply Deﬁnition 5.10’s invariant ∗ ∗ ∗ in the present setting, one simply sets θ ’s R-View equal
to Φ ’s 1-sentence statement. Then ∗ ∗ ∗ implies that both Υ and ¬ Υ must be true under the
Standard-M model because both their proofs had lengths ≤ ♯( Φ ) + 1 .

36

Appendix D: Applications and Examples
This appendix will illustrate four examples of generic conﬁgurations that satisfy Theorems 5.9 and 5.11 (and which therefore are self-justifying). It will be divided into three
parts. Section D-1 will deﬁne our ﬁrst example of self-justifying conﬁguration, called ξ ∗ .
It will use semantic tableaux deduction. Section D-2 will prove that ξ ∗ is EA-stable.
Section D-3 will brieﬂy sketch three additional examples of stable generic conﬁgurations
It is likely preferable to examine Sections 3 – 6 before this appendix. However, Section
D-1’s short 2-page discussion can be read quite easily either before or after Section 6.

D-1. Definition of the EA-Stable Configuration ξ ∗
Our ﬁrst example of an EA-Stable conﬁguration, called ξ ∗ , will be deﬁned in this section.
Its deduction method will be semantic tableaux. Its base axiom system B ∗ will be a
Type-A formalism, which treats addition but not multiplication as a total function (i.e.
see Equation (2) ).
The closest analog of B ∗ and ξ ∗ in our prior work appeared in Section 5 of [64]. (It
diﬀered from ξ ∗ partly because it did not use Deﬁnition 3.4’s unifying notation.) In [64],
a function F was called Non-Growth iﬀ F (a1 , a2 , ...aj ) ≤ M aximum(a1 , a2 , ...aj ) for

all a1 , a2 , ...aj . Six examples of non-growth functions are:

1. Integer Subtraction where “ x− y ” is deﬁned to equal zero in the special case where
x ≤ y,
2. Integer Division where “ x ÷ y ” equals x when y = 0, and it equals ⌊ x/y ⌋
otherwise,

3. Root(x, y) which equals ⌈ x1/y ⌉ when y ≥ 1, and it equals x when y = 0.
4. M aximum(x, y),
5. Logarithm(x) = ⌊ Log2 (x) ⌋ when x ≥ 2, and zero otherwise.
6. Count(x, j) = the number of “1” bits among x’s rightmost j bits.
These operations were called Grounding Functions in [64]. The term U-Grounding
Function referred to a set of functions that included the Grounding operations plus the
further primitives of addition and Double(x) = x + x. (The Double operation is helpful
because it signiﬁcantly enhances [64]’s linguistic eﬃciency 20 .)
The symbol ∆∗0 will be the analog of Deﬁnition 3.1’s ∆ξ0 construct under the UGrounding function language. (It will be deﬁned to be any formula in a U-Grounding
20

The symbol Double(x) was technically unnecessary in [64]’s formalism because x + x can encode
Double(x). However, its notation adds expressive power to [64]’s language because, for example, Double(Double(Double(Double(x))) requires less memory space to encode than than x added to itself 16
times.

37

language where all its quantiﬁers are bounded.) It is easy in this context to encode a
∆∗0 formula M ult(x, y, z) for representing multiplication’s graph. For instance, Equation
(45) is one such ∆∗0 formula (which actually does not employ any bounded quantiﬁers):
[ (x = 0 ∨ y = 0) ⇒ z = 0 ] ∧ [ (x 6= 0 ∧ y 6= 0 ) ⇒ (

z
z−1
=y ∧
< y ) ] (45)
x
x

Expression (45) is signiﬁcant because Part 2 of Deﬁnition 3.4 indicated every generic
conﬁguration must have available some method to represent the graphs of addition and
multiplication in a ∆ξ0 styled format, similar to (45)’s paradigm. (Addition can be treated
trivially because the U-grounding language possesses an addition function symbol.) The
footnote 21 serves as a reminder about why these ∆∗0 encodings are needed. Our next
goal is to deﬁne the generic conﬁguration ξ ∗ that Section D-2 will prove is EA-stable.
Definition D.1. The language L∗ of the generic conﬁguration ξ ∗ will be built in
a natural manner out of the eight U-grounding function operations, the usual atomic
predicate symbols of “ = ” and “ ≤ ”, and the three constant symbols K0 , K1 and

K2 (that deﬁne the integers of 0, 1 and 2). The other components of ξ ∗ ’s conﬁguration
are deﬁned below:

i As previously noted, ∆∗0 is deﬁned to represent the set of all formulae in L∗ ’s language, whose quantiﬁers are bounded in an arbitrary manner by terms employing
the U-Grounding function symbols. (It will thus generate via Deﬁnition 3.1 the
Π∗n and Σ∗n sentences of L∗ .)
ii The base axiom system B ∗ for ξ ∗ will be allowed to be any consistent set of Πξ1

∗

sentences that is capable of proving every ∆∗0 sentence that is valid in StandardM. It will also include sentence (46)’s very precise 22 Π∗1 styled declaration that
addition is a total function.
∀x

∀y

∃ z ≤x+y :

{

z =x+y

}

(46)

iii

ξ ∗ ’s deduction method will be the semantic tableaux method.

iv

ξ ∗ ’ s Gödelized method g for encoding a semantic tableaux proof can be essentially
any natural method that satisﬁes the minor stipulation that at least 5 J bits are
required to encode a semantic tableaux proof that has J function symbols. This

21
Section 3 explained during its discussion of Lemma 3.6 that every generic conﬁguration ξ must have
a means to encode the graphs of addition and multiplication as ∆ξ0 formulae (visavis Parts 1 and 2 of
Deﬁnition 3.4). This enabled Lemma 3.6’s procedure to translate all of conventional arithmetic’s Σj and
Πj formulae into equivalent Σξj and Πξj expressions.

——————————————————The two appearances of the term “ x + y ” in sentence (46) may at ﬁrst appear to be redundant.
(This statement is equivalent to sentence (4)’s declaration that addition is a total function, which had
avoided such redundancy.) The virtue of (46)’s format is that it is a Π∗1 styled statement, unlike (4)’s
Π∗2 styled format. This sharpened Π∗1 perspective will help simplify some of our proofs.
22

38

stipulation is called the “Conventional Tableaux Encoding Requirement”.
It is trivial 23 to corroborate that all the usual methods for encoding semantic
tableaux proofs satisfy this criteria. (The Appendix A of [64] provides one example
of a possible tableaux encoding method. Any other natural mechanism for encoding
tableaux proofs is equally suitable.)
Section D-2 will, interestingly, prove that ξ ∗ is EA-stable. This will imply (via
Theorem 5.9) that B ∗ ∪ SelfCons1 { B ∗ , d } is self-justifying. Theorems 6.6, 6.10,

G.2 and G.3 will, formalize, in this context, four diﬀerent methods in which B ∗ can be
extended to construct self-justifying formalisms that are able to prove Peano Arithmetic’s
Π∗1 theorems.
Thus while self-justifying axiom systems contain unavoidable weaknesses, they also
possess the nice feature that they are able to prove many of the useful theorems of
mathematics.

D-2. Proof of the EA-Stability of ξ ∗
This section will prove ξ ∗ is EA-stable and thus satisﬁes the paradigms of Theorems 5.9,
6.3, 6.6, 6.10 and 6.12. Our proof will be based on modifying some of the methodologies
from [64], so that they become applicable to ξ ∗ . Many readers may prefer to omit examining both this part of Appendix D and Section D-3 because they are unnecessary for
understanding the material in Section 6 and Appendixes E and F. (Our recommendation
is that the latter material be read ﬁrst.)
Our notation for deﬁning a semantic tableaux proof in the next paragraph will be
similar to the conventional deﬁnitions appearing in Fitting’s and Smullyan’s textbooks
[12, 40]. It will employ [64]’s notation so that we can employ two of its lemmas during
our analysis of semantic tableaux proofs.
In our discussion, Φ will be called a Prenex-Level( m∗ ) sentence iﬀ it is a Π∗m
or Σ∗m expression that satisﬁes the usual prenex requirement (that all its unbounded
quantiﬁers lie in its leftmost part). If Φ is Prenex-Level(m∗ ) then Reverse(Φ) shall
denote a second Prenex-Level( m∗ ) sentence that is equivalent to ¬ Φ rewritten 24 in
23

The Conventional Tableaux Encoding Criteria requires that the Gödel number of a semantic tableaux
proof, with J function symbols, must be least as large as 32J . It is clear that all the usual methods for
generating the Gödel codes satisfy this criteria. This is because any proof that has J function symbols
will contain at least 2 J logical symbols and thus employ at least 5 J bits.
——————————————————For example, if Φ denotes “ ∀ x ∃ y
“ ∃ x ∀ y ¬ ψ(x, y) ”.
24

ψ(x, y) ” then Reverse(Φ) would be written as

39

a Prenex Level( m∗ ) form. For a ﬁxed axiom system α, its Φ-Based Candidate Tree
will be deﬁned to be a tree structure whose root is the sentence Reverse(Φ) and whose
all other nodes are either axioms of α or deductions from higher nodes of the tree, via
the rules 1–8 given below. (The symbol “ A =⇒ B ” in rules 1-8 will mean that B is
a valid deduction from its ancestor A in the germane deduction tree.)
1. Υ ∧ Γ =⇒ Υ and Υ ∧ Γ =⇒ Γ .
2. ¬ ¬ Υ =⇒ Υ. Other rules for the “ ¬ ” symbol are: ¬(Υ ∨ Γ) =⇒ ¬Υ ∧ ¬Γ,
¬(Υ → Γ) =⇒ Υ ∧ ¬Γ ,
and

¬(Υ ∧ Γ) =⇒ ¬Υ ∨ ¬Γ , ¬ ∃v Υ(v) =⇒ ∀v¬ Υ(v)

¬ ∀v Υ(v) =⇒ ∃v ¬Υ(v)

3. A pair of sibling nodes Υ and Γ is allowed when their ancestor is Υ ∨ Γ.
4. A pair of sibling nodes ¬Υ and Γ is allowed when their ancestor is Υ → Γ.
5. ∃v Υ(v) =⇒ Υ(u) where u is a newly introduced “Parameter Symbol”.
6. ∃v ≤ s Υ(v)

=⇒

u ≤ s ∧ Υ(u) is the variation of Rule 5 for bounded

existential quantiﬁers of the form “ ∃v ≤ s ”.

7. ∀v Υ(v) =⇒ Υ(t) where t denotes a U-Grounded term. These terms may be
any one of a constant symbol, a parameter symbol (deﬁned by a prior application

of Rules 5 or 6 to some some ancestor of the current node), or a U-Grounding
function-symbol with recursively deﬁned inputs.
8. ∀v ≤ s Υ(v) =⇒ t ≤ s → Υ(t) is the variation of Rule 7 for a bounded quantiﬁer
such as “ ∀v ≤ s ”

Let us say a leaf-to-root branch (in a candidate tree) is Closed iﬀ it contains both some
sentence Υ and its negation “ ¬ Υ ”. Then a Semantic Tableaux Proof of Φ, from

the axiom system α, is deﬁned to be a Φ-Based Candidate Tree whose every leaf-to-root
branch is closed.
It is next helpful to deﬁne the notion of a Z-Based Deduction Tree, in a context

where Z represents an axiom system, typically diﬀerent from the prior paragraph’s α .
This object will be deﬁned to be identical to a semantic tableaux proof, except for the
following changes:
i Every node in a Z−Based deduction tree must be either an axiom of Z or a deduction
from a higher node of the tree via the rules 1-8. (This applies also to the root of a
Z−Based deduction tree. It will store an axiom of Z in its root, unlike a semantic
tableaux proof which had stored Reverse(Φ) in its root.)

40

ii There will be no requirement that each leaf-to-root branch be closed in a Z−Based
deduction tree. (Indeed, some branch will automatically not be closed if Z is
consistent.)
Items (i) and (ii) make it apparent that Z−Based deduction trees are diﬀerent from
semantic tableaux proofs. It will turn out, nevertheless, that the study of Z−Based
deduction trees will clarify the nature of semantic tableaux proofs.

Definition D.2. Let a and b denote two integers that are powers of 2 satisfying
a > b ≥ 2 Then an axiom system Z (employing L∗ ’s language) will be called a

Normed(a,b) formalism iﬀ:

1. All Z’s axioms are either Π∗1 or Σ∗1 sentences.
2. Each Π∗1 axiom of Z will satisfy Deﬁnition 4.3’s Good( Log2 a ) criteria, and each
Σ∗1 axiom of Z will likewise satisfy Good( Log2 b ).

Clarification about Definition D.2 :

The “Normed(a,b)” concept (above)

is obviously equivalent to the same-named notion appearing in Deﬁnition 4 of [64].
It uses, however, a diﬀerent notation to make it compatible with Section 4’s formalism. Thus, Item 2’s assertion that the Π∗1 axiom ∀ v1 ∀ v2 ...∀vk φ(v1 , v2 , ...vk ) satis-

ﬁes Good( Log2 a ) is equivalent to (47)’s statement. The Good( Log2 b ) property of
∃ v1 ∃ v2 ... ∃ vk φ(v1 , v2 , ...vk ) is, likewise, equivalent to (48).
∀ v1 < a ∀ v2 < a ...∀ vk < a

:

φ(v1 , v2 , ...vk ) .

(47)

∃ v1 < b ∃ v2 < b ...∃ vk < b

:

φ(v1 , v2 , ...vk ) .

(48)

Our interests in this notation will center around Fact D.3’s invariant:

41

Fact D.3 . Let ξ ∗ denote Deﬁnition D.1’s generic conﬁguration, and Z be an extension of ξ ∗ ’s base axiom system B ∗ which satisﬁes Deﬁnition D.2’s Normed(a, b) constraint. Then any Z−Based deduction tree T that has a Gödel number smaller than
(a/b)4 must contain at least one root-to-leaf branch, called σ , that is not “closed”. (In
other words, this path σ will be contradiction-free, insofar as it does not contain both
some sentence Ψ and its formal negation).
Proof:

The justiﬁcation of Fact D.3 is a direct consequence of the Lemmas 1 and

2 appearing in article [64] (see footnote 25 for more details).

25

✷

A proof of Fact D.3 from ﬁrst principles would be quite complicated because there are eight elimi-

nation rules employed by semantic tableaux deduction, each of which needs to be examined by such a
proof’s umbrella formalism. Fortunately, we do not need provide such a complicated analysis here because a 4-page proof of the Lemmas 1 and 2 in Section 5.2 of [64] had already visited these issues. Thus,
Fact D.3 turns out to be an easy consequence of these two lemmas after the following two straightforward
issues are addressed:
1. Section 5.2 of [64] had deﬁned the “U-Height” of a deduction tree to be the largest number of
U-Grounding function symbols that appear in any of its root-to-leaf branches. Its Lemma 1 proved
that every deduction tree with a U-Height ≤ Log2 a − Log2 b will contain at least one branch

satisfying a condition, which [64] called “Positive(a,b)”. The Lemma 2 in [64] then showed that
this Positive(a,b) property implies that the germane deduction tree must contain some branch
that is contradiction-free. The combination of these two lemmas thus amounts to the establishing
of the following rephrased hybridized statement:
•

If a Z-based deduction tree has a U-Height ≤ Log2 a − Log2 b , then some branch

of it is contradiction-free (i.e. this branch cannot contain both some sentence Ψ and
its negation).

2. Fact D.3 ’s hypothesis indicated the Gödel number g for its deduction tree satisﬁed the following
conditions:
I.
II.

g ≤ (a/b)4

The U-Height of g ’s deduction tree is less than

1
5

Log2 g . (This is simply because Fact

D.3 presumes that the “Conventional Tableaux Encoding” methodology from Part-iv of
Deﬁnition D.1 was used to encode g’s Gödel number.)
Items I and II imply g ’s tree has a U-Height ≤ Log2 a − Log2 b. The invariant • then implies

this deduction tree has at least one branch that is contradiction-free (as Fact D.3 claimed). ✷

We emphasize that the above justiﬁcation of Fact D.3 is much simpler than a proof from ﬁrst principles.
The latter would require examining eight diﬀerent tableaux elimination rules, as the detailed proofs of
[64]’s Lemmas 1 and 2 actually did do.

42

We will now apply Fact D.3 to prove Theorem D.4. Its invariant will, interestingly,
collapse entirely 26 if one were to merely add a multiplication function symbol to the UGrounding language. This is why our boundary-case exceptions to the semantic tableaux
version of the Second Incompleteness allow a Type-A axiom system to recognize addition
as a total function (but suppress a similar treatment of multiplication).
Theorem D.4. The generic configuration ξ ∗ is both A-stable and E-stable. (This
implies many diﬀerent self-justifying formalisms exist via Theorems 5.9, 6.3, 6.6, 6.10,
6.12, G.2 and G.3.)
Our proof of Theorem D.4 will separately show ξ ∗ is A-stable and E-stable.
Proof of ξ ∗ ’s A-stability : Suppose for the sake of establishing a proof by contradiction that ξ ∗ was not A-stable. Then the constraint ∗ of Deﬁnition 5.1 would be
violated by at least some θ ∈ RE-Class(ξ). This violation will cause the statement +

to be true for such a θ :

+ There exists a semantic tableaux proof p of a Π∗1 theorem, called say Υ , from
the axiom system of θ ∪ B ξ such that Log(p) ≤ ♯( θ) + 1 and where Υ also

fails to satisfy Good{

1
2

♯( θ) } .

Let us recall that if Υ is Π∗1 then Reverse( Υ ) is a Σ∗1 sentence equivalent to ¬Υ . Thus,
Reverse( Υ ) will satisfy Good{

1
2

♯( θ) } criteria (simply because it has the opposite

goodness property as Υ ). Also, if Z denotes the axiom system of θ∪B ξ + Reverse( Υ ),
√
it is easy to verify 27 that Z ’s axioms will satisfy the Normed{ 2 ♯( θ ) , 2 ♯( θ ) } criteria.

It is next helpful to observe that what is a proof from one perspective corresponds
to being a deduction tree from a diﬀerent perspective. Thus, Item + ’s proof p of the
26

The diﬃculty posed by multiplication can be easily understood when one compares two integers
sequences x0 , x1 , x2 , ... and y0 , y1 , y2 , ..., deﬁned as follows:
xi = xi−1 + xi−1
AND
yi = yi−1 ∗ yi−1
It turns out that the faster growth rate of multiplication under the series y0 , y1 , y2 , ... enables one to
to construct tiny Z−Based deduction trees T that violate the analog of Fact D.3 ’s paradigm. (This is
because such trees can have Gödel numbers smaller than (a/b)4 , while all their root-to-leaf branches can
be simultaneously “closed” via contradictions.) This property of multiplication is analogous to Example
3.7’s observations about how the diﬀering growth rates of x0 , x1 , x2 , ... and y0 , y1 , y2 , ... are related to the
threshold where the semantic tableaux version of Second Incompleteness Theorem can be evaded.
——————————————————√
2 ♯( θ ) } because:
The axiom system Z must satisfy Normed{ 2 ♯( θ ) ,

27

1. The quantity 2 ♯( θ ) is a valid ﬁrst component for Z’s norming constraint because all the axioms
of B ξ are true in the Standard-M model and because Deﬁnition 4.4 implies all of θ ’s axioms
satisfy Good { ♯( θ) }.
√
2. The quantity
2 ♯( θ ) is a valid second component for Z’s norming constraint because
Reverse( Υ ) is the only Σ∗1 sentence belonging to Z, and because Reverse( Υ ) satisﬁes
Good{ 21 ♯( θ) } .

43

theorem Υ from the axiom system of θ ∪ B ξ corresponds to being a Z-based deduction

tree, with Z representing the axiom system of θ ∪ B ξ + Reverse( Υ ). In this context,

Item + ’s inequality of Log(p) ≤ ♯( θ ) + 1 implies 28 that p , viewed as a deduction

tree for Z , satisﬁes the hypothesis of Fact D.3 . Hence, Fact D.3 establishes that p
must contain at least one contradiction-free root-to-leaf branch.

This last observation is all that is needed to conﬁrm ξ ∗ ’s A-stability, via a proof-bycontradiction. This is because the deﬁnition of a semantic tableaux proof implies every
one of its root-to-leaf branches must end with a pair of contradicting nodes. However,
the last paragraph showed p will not satisfy this required property, if ξ ∗ is not A-stable.
Hence our construction has proven the A-stability of ξ ∗ by showing that otherwise an
infeasible circumstance will arise.

✷

Proof of ξ ∗ ’s E-stability : A proof-by-contradiction will verify ξ ∗ is E-stable,
analogous to the proof of its A-stability. Thus if ξ ∗ was not E-stable, then statement
++ would be true for some θ. (This is because at least one θ ∈ RE-Class(ξ) would then

violate Deﬁnition 5.3’s requirement of ∗ ∗ .)

++ There exists a semantic tableaux proof p of a Σξ1 theorem Υ from the axiom system θ ∪ B ξ such that Log(p) ≤ ♯( θ)+ 1 and Υ also fails to satisfy Good{ 12 ♯( θ) }.
Item ++ implies Reverse(Υ) satisﬁes Good{ 12 ♯( θ)} (because Reverse(Υ) again has
the opposite goodness property as Υ ). Let Z now denote the formal axiom system of
θ ∪ B ξ + Reverse(Υ). The footnote 29 then uses reasoning similar to footnote 27 to show
√
2 ♯( θ ) , 2 }
Z satisﬁes Normed{
As before via a simple change in notation, p ’s semantic tableaux proof of Υ can be
viewed as a deduction tree using Z ’s axioms. Also as before, we may use the combination
√
of the facts that Z is a Normed{
2 ♯( θ ) , 2 } system and that Item ++ indicated

Log(p) ≤ ♯( θ) + 1 to deduce30 that p is small enough to satisfy Fact D.3 ’s hypothesis.

28
Without loss of generality, we may assume that every non-trivial proof p satisﬁes Log(p) ≥ 64
(since a string with fewer than 64 bits is too short to be a proof). Then the footnoted paragraph’s
Log(p) ≤ ♯( θ) √+ 1 inequality trivially implies p < 3 ♯( θ ) . In a context where Z is a
Normed{ 2 ♯( θ ) ,
2 ♯( θ ) } axiom system, the latter inequality certainly implies p , viewed as a
deduction tree for Z , has a small enough√Gödel number to satisfy the hypothesis for Fact D.3. (This is
because if one sets a = 2 ♯( θ ) and b = 2 ♯( θ ) then obviously p < 3 ♯( θ ) < 4 ♯( θ ) = (a/b)4 ).

——————————————————√
The axiom system Z must satisfy Normed{
2 ♯( θ ) , 2 } because:
√
2 ♯( θ ) because Reverse( Υ )
1. The ﬁrst component of its norming constraint can be set equal to
∗
∗
1
is a Good{ 2 ♯( θ ) } Π1 sentence, and all Z ’s other Π1 sentences satisfy more relaxed
constraints.

29

2. The second component of Z’s norming constraint is satisﬁed by the constant of 2 because Deﬁnition
D.2 implies this quantity is always permissible when Z contains no Σ∗1 axiom sentences.
——————————————————The proof that p is small enough to satisfy Fact D.3 ’s hypothesis in the current E-stable case is

30

44

Hence once again, Fact D.3 implies that Z must contain at least one contradiction-free
root-to-leaf branch. As before, the existence of this contradiction-free path violates the
deﬁnition of a semantic tableaux proof and enables our proof-by-contradiction to reach
its desired end. ✷
Remark D.5 (about Theorem D.4’s significance) : Part-ii of Deﬁnition D.1 indicated
ξ ∗ ’s base axiom of

B ∗ was a Type-A formalism that recognized addition as a total

function. This is signiﬁcant because [60, 62, 67, 68] showed nearly all Type-M formalisms,
including all the common axiomatizations for IΣ0 , are unable to recognize their semantic
tableaux consistency. Thus, the declaration that multiplication is a total function is the
trigger-point causing 31 the semantic tableaux version of the Second Incompleteness
Theorem to become active. This threshold eﬀect is signiﬁcant because Theorem D.4,
combined with Theorems 6.6, 6.10, G.2 and G.3, formalize four different respects in
which Type-A self-justifying formalisms can prove all Peano Arithmetic’s Π∗1 theorems
( after multiplication’s totality axiom is suppressed).

D-3. Three Further Examples of Stable Generic Configurations
Our second example of an EA-stable conﬁguration is called ξ ∗∗ . It will be identical to
ξ ∗ except that it will replace semantic tableaux with a stronger deduction method, which
[64] called Tab−U1∗ . The latter is a revised version of semantic tableaux that permits a
modus ponens rule to perform deductive cut operations on Π∗1 and Σ∗1 sentences. (The
formal deﬁnition of Tab−U1∗ deduction had appeared in [64]. It will be unnecessary to
repeat here.)
The Section 5.3 of [64] noted Tab−U1∗ has similar self-justiﬁcation properties as
conventional semantic tableaux. All the results that Section D-2 proved about ξ ∗ apply
also to ξ ∗∗ , via their natural generalization under [64]’s Tab−U1∗ deduction method.
Thus, ξ ∗∗ is also EA-stable.
A key point is that there is a non-trivial distinction between ξ ∗ and ξ ∗∗ , despite the
fact that they have similar technical qualities. This is because ξ ∗∗ contains a Level-1
modus ponens rule (unlike ξ ∗ ). If it were infeasible to expand ξ ∗ into a broader ξ ∗∗ ,
then both formalisms could, perhaps, be easily dismissed as having negligible pragmatic
almost identical to Footnote 28’s analysis of the A-stable case. Thus as in the earlier case, Item ++’s
inequality of Log(p) ≤ ♯( θ) + 1 trivially implies p < 3 ♯( θ ) . Also, we may again assume that
Log(p) ≥ 64 (since a sequence with fewer than 64 bits cannot amount to a proof of any interesting
fact under all normal coding conventions). An analog of Footnote √
28’s chain of inequalities will then
allow us to conclude that p is small enough proof from a Normed{
2 ♯( θ ) , 2 } system to satisfy the
hypothesis for Fact D.3.
——————————————————We formally proved in [60, 62, 67, 68] that multiplication’s totality property causes the semantic
tableaux version of the Second Incompleteness Theorem to become active. The Example 3.7 summarizes
the main intuition behind these results.
31

45

signiﬁcance (since modus ponens is central to cogitation). However in a context where
ξ ∗∗ does permit a Level-1 modus ponens rule, it is a tempting formalism (despite its
limited modus ponens rule).
Unlike ξ ∗ and ξ ∗∗ , our third example of an EA-stable conﬁguration, called ξ − , will
support an unlimited modus ponens rule. This will be possible because ξ − ’s language
of L− will be weaker than the languages of ξ ∗ and ξ ∗∗ . Thus L− will include
the six Grounding functions, but not the Growth functions of addition and doubling. It
will thus treat addition and multiplication as 3-way atomic predicates, Add(x, y, z) and
Mult(x, y, z), rather than as formal functions.
This perspective enabled ξ − to support an evasion of the Second Incompleteness
Theorem with an unlimited modus ponens rule present, in a context where the other
four parts of its generic conﬁguration are deﬁned below:
− will be built in an essentially natural manner from the
1. The ∆−
0 class for ξ

Grounding function set. It will thus include all formulae in L− ’s language, whose
quantiﬁers are bounded in any arbitrary manner using the Grounding function
primitives.
2. The base axiom system B − of ξ − will employ an inﬁnite number of constant
symbols, denoted as K1 , K2 , K3 , ... where K1 = 1 and where Ki+1 is a power of 2
deﬁned by the axiom of:
Add( Ki , Ki , Ki+1 )

(49)

Thus, the combination of K1 , K2 , K3 , ... with the Grounding function of subtraction allows the language L− to encode the value of any arbitrary natural number
(as Part 1 of Deﬁnition 3.4 had required). Essentially, ξ − ’s base axiom system of
B − can be any consistent r.e. set of Π−
1 sentences that includes (49)’s axiom
schema and is able to prove every ∆−
0 sentence which is valid in the Standard-M
model.
3. ξ − ’s deduction method can be any version of a classic Hilbert-style proof methodology. (Thus, it will include a modus ponens rule with no restrictions.)
4. ξ − ’s Gödelization method can be essentially any natural technique.
An interesting aspect of ξ − is it can be proven to be EA-stable via an analog of Section
D-2’s treatment of ξ ∗ . Thus, Theorem 6.6 implies every axiom system α, whose Π−
1
theorems hold true in the Standard-M model, can be mapped onto an extension of ξ − ’s
base axiom system that can recognize its own Hilbert consistency and prove α’s Π−
1
theorems. Except for minor changes in notation, this result represents a new way of
proving [66]’s Theorem 3.

46

The self-justifying features of ξ ∗ , ξ ∗∗ and ξ − are of interest primarily because the
Second Incompleteness Theorem implies that they cannot be improved much further.
This tight ﬁt is summarized by Items 1-4.
1. The Theorem 2.1 (due to the combined work of Nelson, Pudlák, Solovay and WilkieParis [26, 33, 44, 58] ) implies no natural axiom system can prove Successor is a total
function and recognize its own Hilbert consistency. This theorem thus explains why
the presence of growth functions must be omitted from ξ − ’s base axiom system of
B −.
2. Moreover, [66] proved ξ − ’s method for evading the Second Incompleteness Theorem will collapse if one replaces Equation (49)’s “addition-based named sequence”
of constant symbols K1 , K2 , K3 , ... with a faster growing “multiplicative convention”, where the constant symbols C1 , C2 , C3 , ... are formally deﬁned via (50)’s
schema.
Mult( Ci , Ci , Ci+1 )

(50)

Thus, [66] showed that there exists a Π−
1 sentence W (provable from Peano Arithmetic) such that no consistent system can simultaneously prove W , contain (50)’s
axiom schema and prove the non-existence of proof of 0 = 1 from itself. There
is no space to prove it here, but a generalization of the Second Incompleteness
Theorem implies the modiﬁcation of ξ − that replaces (49)’s axiom schema with
(50)’s schema is not even 0-stable.
3. Similarly, [62, 67] proved that if ξ ∗ ’s and ξ ∗∗ ’s base axiom system of B ∗ was
strengthened to include the assumption that multiplication was a total function
then [64]’s two semantic tableaux evasions of the Second Incompleteness Theorem
would both collapse.
4. Also, [63] proved that an analog of ξ ∗∗ ’s evasion of the Second Incompleteness
Theorem will collapse if its modus ponens rule was expanded to apply to either Π∗2
or Σ∗2 sentences.
The Item 3 is especially interesting because [65] proved [64]’s evasion of the Second
Incompleteness Theorem was compatible with its formalism recognizing an inﬁnitized
generalization of a computer’s ﬂoating point multiplication as a total function. Thus
while the semantic tableaux formalisms of ξ ∗ or ξ ∗∗ are provably unable [62, 67] to
recognize integer multiplication as a total function, their relationship to ﬂoating point
multiplication is more subtle.
Our fourth example of an application of Section 6’s theorems was stimulated by some
insightful email we received from L. A. Kolodziejczyk [20] in 2005. It noted there existed
a potential exponential gap between the lengths of semantic tableaux and Herbrand-style
47

proofs under some circumstances. Our earlier research [62] addressed a 1981 Paris-Wilkie
open question [30] by generalizing some Adamowicz-Zbierski techniques [1, 3] to show
a natural axiomatization of IΣ0 satisﬁed the semantic tableaux version of the Second
Incompleteness Theorem. In this context, Kolodziejczyk asked whether this would apply
to all plausible axiomatizations for IΣ0 ?
We replied in [68] to Kolodziejczyk’s stimulating question by distinguishing between
R
Example 3.2’s ∆A
0 and ∆0 formulae and by using the Paris-Dimitracopoulos [28] transla-

tion algorithm for ∆0 formulae. (The latter procedure was summarized earlier by Lemma
R
3.6. It demonstrated how to map classic arithmetic’s ∆A
0 formulae onto equivalent ∆0

formulae in the Standard-M model.) Our reply to Kolodziejczyk’s question, thus, employed this translation methodology to show that there existed an axiom system, called
Ax-3, which proved the identical set of theorems as the more common Ax-1 and Ax-2
encodings of IΣ0 and which possessed the following pair of quite fascinating contrasting
properties:
A No consistent superset β of Ax-3’s set of axioms is capable of proving its own
semantic tableaux consistency [68].
B In contrast, if “Herb” denotes the next paragraph’s Herbrand-styled deduction and
if “SelfRef” denotes the sentence • from Section 1, then Ax3 + SelfRef(Ax-3,Herb)
will be a self-justifying axiom system.

The intuition behind [68]’s proof of Items A and B can be easily summarized if we
deﬁne a “Herbrandized-style” proof of a theorem Φ from an axiom system α as being
an essentially 2-part structure where:
1. Each of α’s axioms and also the sentence ¬Φ are ﬁrst written as Skolemized
expressions.

2. A propositional calculus proof is then used to show that some formal conjunction
of instances of Item 1’s Skolemization schema has no satisfying truth assignment.
Such a formalism is diﬀerent from the deﬁnition of a semantic tableaux proof (appearing
in for example Fitting’s textbook [12] ). This is because the latter replaces the use of
Skolemization in Items 1 and 2 with an existential quantiﬁer elimination rule. It turns
out that this distinction enables some semantic tableaux proofs to be exponentially more
compressed than their Herbrandized counterparts, as Kolodziejczyk observed [20, 21].
This fact enabled [68] to prove that Herbrandized and semantic tableaux proofs have the
divergent properties summarized by Items A and B.
One reason Ax-3’s evasion of the Second Incompleteness Theorem is of interest is
that IΣ0 supports many more generalizations of the Second Incompleteness Theorem
than evasions of it. Thus, Willard [62, 67, 68] proved that the semantic tableaux version
48

of the Second Incompleteness Theorem was valid for three diﬀerent encodings of IΣ0 ,
and Adamowicz, Salehi and Zbierski have discussed in great detail [1, 3, 37] various
Herbrandized generalizations of the Second Incompleteness Theorem for particular encodings of IΣ0 and IΣ0 + Ωi . Moreover, an added facet of [68]’s Ax-3 encoding for IΣ0 is
that most automated theorem provers use a particular variant of the Resolution method
that causes [68]’s unusual methodology to apply also to them 32 .
The reason for our interest in [68]’s results is that it represents a fourth example where
the meta-theorems from Sections 5 and 6 can be useful. Thus, the footnote 33 summarizes
how a fourth type of generic conﬁguration, called ξ R , can be deﬁned that both duplicates
[68]’s main self-justiﬁcation results under the above deﬁnition of Herb-deduction, as well
as strengthens them. (In particular, ξ R meets Theorem 5.11’s requirements, and selfjustifying extensions of its Ax-3 system thus recognize their Level(0R ) consistency.)
The properties of our four generic conﬁgurations of ξ R , ξ ∗ , ξ ∗∗ and ξ − are
summarized by Table I. These conﬁgurations are listed in ascending order according to
the strength of their deduction methods d . As their deduction methods increase in
strength, these conﬁgurations have their ability reduced to recognize the totality of the
addition and multiplication operations.
ξ R is thus a Type Almost-M system that can prove multiplication is a total function
(but which does not contain Equation (5)’s totality statement as an axiom). On the other
hand, ξ − uses a stronger Hilbert-styled deduction methodology, which is incompatible
with treating the totality of addition or multiplication as either axioms or as derived
theorems.
32

The main theorems in [68] generalize for resolution because Resolution-based theorem provers employ
skolemization analogously to Herbrand deduction.
——————————————————The discussion in [68] did not technically use Deﬁnition 5.3’s machinery to establish there existed
an extension of its “Ax-3” encoding for IΣ0 that could recognize its own Herbrand consistency. Its
formalism, however, could be easily couched in terms of Deﬁnition 5.3’s machinery, if one uses a generic
conﬁguration ξ R where
33

1. ξ R ’s base language is the same as the usual language of arithmetic,
2. ξ R ’s ∆R
0 sub-class is deﬁned by Item (b) in Example 3.2,
3. ξ R ’s base axiom system is [68]’s “Ax-3” system,
4. ξ R ’s deduction method is either a Herbrandized styled-method or a Resolution system that relies
upon Skolemizatin in a similar manner.
5. ξ R ’s Gödel encoding scheme may be any such natural method.
This approach supports a stronger form of self-justiﬁcation result than had appeared in [68]. This is
because ξ R can be proven to be E-stable (by a generalization of [68]’s analysis techniques). Thus,
Theorem 5.11 implies that Ax-3 has a well-deﬁned self-justifying extension that can recognizes its own
formalized Level(0R ) consistency. (This self-justiﬁcation result is stronger than [68]’s main theorem. The
latter merely established that some extension of Ax-3 recognized the non-existence of a Herbrandized
deduction of 0 = 1 from itself.)
——————————————————-

49

Each of Table I’s rows ξ R , ξ ∗∗ and ξ − are maximal (in that an alternate row
improves upon one column’s measurement only when it is weaker from the perspective
of another column). Only ξ ∗ is an exception to this rule: It is strictly weaker 34 than
ξ ∗∗ . This appendix has discussed ξ ∗ because it makes Theorem D.4’s proof simpler (and
also because semantic tableaux is a frequent topic in the logic literature).
Table I
Name

Deduction Method

Type
A

Almost
M

Type
M

Axiom
Format

Self-Just
Level

ξR

Resolution and/or
Herbrandized analogs

Yes35

Yes

No

E-stable

Level (0R )

ξ∗

Semantic Tableaux

Yes

No

No

EA-stable

Level (1∗ )

ξ ∗∗

Tab−U1∗ Deduction 34

Yes

No

No

EA-stable

Level (1∗ )

ξ−

Hilbert Deduction

No

No

No

EA-stable

Level ( ∞− )

The footnote 35 , attached to Table I’s ﬁrst row, explains why a caveat is attached
to its ﬁrst “Yes” entry. The theme of Table I is that self-justifying axiom systems have
some nice redeeming features, although the Second Incompleteness Theorem clearly also
imposes severe limits on their abilities. This point will be reinforced when Appendix E
introduces a generalization of the Second Incompleteness Theorem, that shows Theorem
6.12’s translational reﬂection principle is close to being a maximal feasible result, and
when Appendix F discusses the epistemological signiﬁcance of self justiﬁcation.

34

ξ ∗∗ employs a stronger deduction method than ξ ∗ because it allows a modus ponens rule for Π∗1
and Σ∗1 sentences to be added to semantic tableaux deduction (see [64] for the precise deﬁnition of this
“Tab−U1∗ ” modiﬁcation of the semantic tableaux deductive method).
——————————————————For the sake of simplicity, the Ax-3 system of [68] did not use either Equations (2) or (4)’s as
axiom statements (since they were provable as theorems). All [68]’s results do, however, generalize when
(2)’s statement about addition’s totality is included as an axiom. Thus, it is appropriate to attach the
designation of “Yes” with a caveat to the “Type-A” entry in Table I’s ﬁrst row. (This row is called
“Resolution and/or Herbrandized analogs” because it applies to essentially any deduction scheme that
relies upon Skolemization as an alternative to [12]’s semantic tableaux existential quantiﬁer elimination
rule.)
35

50

Appendix E: A Clarification of Theorem 6.12’s Significance
It has been known since the time of Gödel that most conventional arithmetic axiom
systems will satisfy the following two invariants:
1. They are physically unable to prove their own consistency
2. They are Σ1 complete. This means they can formally prove any Σ1 arithmetic
sentence that holds true in the Standard-M model, and they can likewise refute
any Πξ1 sentence that is false.
Let ξ denote any generic conﬁguration of the form (Lξ , ∆ξ0 , B ξ , d, G). This appendix
will use the term ξ−Conventional to describe any axiom system that satisﬁes analogs
of the preceding conditions for generic conﬁgurations. Thus α is ξ−Conventional iﬀ it
satisﬁes the following two criteria:
a.

The axiom system α will be unable to verify its own consistency under ξ ’s
deduction method of d .

b.

The axiom system α will be an extension of ξ ’s base axiom of B ξ . Part-3 of
Deﬁnition 3.4 will thus imply it is Σξ1 complete. (Hence, α can formally prove any
Σξ1 sentence that holds true in the Standard-M model, and it can likewise refute
any Πξ1 sentence that is false.)
This section will prove no analog of Equation (34)’s translational reﬂection principle

is feasible for ξ−Conventional axiom systems. Thus, Theorem 6.12 must be close to
being a maximal result, since it cannot plausibly be further extended to hold under
conventional axiom systems.
Theorem E.1 (A New Type of Version of the Second Incompleteness Theorem):
There exists no ξ−Conventional axiom system α that can prove the validity of (51)’s
Translational Reflection Principle for any translation-mapping T. (In other words, there
exists no algorithm T that maps Πξ1 sentences Ψ onto alternate Πξ1 sentences ΨT ,
which are equivalent to Ψ in the Standard-M model and where α can verify (51)’s
reﬂection principle for every Πξ1 sentence Ψ. )
∀ p [ Prfα,d ( ⌈ Ψ ⌉ , p )

⇒

ΨT ]

(51)

Proof: It is easy to prove Theorem E.1 via a proof-by-contradiction. Thus consider
the possibility that Theorem E.1’s translational mapping T did exist. One can then
easily select a Πξ1 sentences Ψ that is false in the Standard-M model. Then ΨT is also
false under the Standard-M model (since Ψ and ΨT are equivalent in this model).
Hence Part-b of the deﬁnition of ξ−Conventionality implies α must prove ¬ ΨT

(on account of ΨT ’s Πξ1 format).

51

It is at this juncture that our proof-by-contradiction will reach its end. This is
because if α can prove (51)’s statement and also prove the sentence ¬ ΨT , then it

certainly can combine these two facts to prove the non-existence of a proof of Ψ . The
latter contradicts Part-a of the deﬁnition of ξ−Conventionality (because it shows α can
verify its own consistency).

✷

Remark E.2. We remind the reader that Footnote 14 pointed out that T ’s translational mapping would lose its main functionality, if it did not require ΨT to have a Πξ1
format, similar to Ψ. In essence, Theorem E.1 is of interest because it shows that Theorem 6.12’s evasion of the Second Incompleteness Theorem is close to being a maximal
result. (It thus shows that (51)’s translational reﬂection principle does not generalize
to conventional axiom systems.) This dichotomy may explain why self-justifying axiom
systems, along with Theorem 6.12’s particular invariant, are potentially useful results.

Appendix F: Epistemological Perspective and Speculations
It is desirable to include a short purely epistemological discussion within this mostly
mathematical article so that the more subtle nature of our results cannot be misconstrued.
Part of the reason Self Justiﬁcation can lend itself to easy misinterpretations is that
the First Incompleteness Theorem demonstrates the impossibility of constructing an
ideally optimal axiomatization of number theory. For any initial r.e. axiom system α
and deduction method d, Gödel thus noted it is easy 36 to develop an extension of α
that can prove strictly more theorems than α under d’s deduction method. Moreover,
a large number of generalizations of the Second Incompleteness Theorem, starting with
its 1939 Hilbert-Bernays version [16], are known to be robust results.
Such considerations naturally lead to questions about whether any r.e. axiom system
can encompass the workings of the human mind. It may surprise some readers to learn
that this author shares such skepticism. That is, we doubt any single ISOLATED selfjustifying r.e. logic can fully approximate the complex workings of the human mind.
In this short appendix, let us instead view cogitation as roughly a process wondering though some universe U , comprised of both consistent and inconsistent axiom

systems, with a trial-and-error evolutionary method focusing its attention over time increasingly onto the members of this universe U that are found to be consistent. It is
straightforward37 to deﬁne many universes U and evolutionary processes that fall into
36

Let ✵(a, d) the classic Gödel sentence that asserts: “There is no proof of this sentence from α’s
axiom system under d’s deduction method.” Gödel [14] noted α + ✵(α, d) always proves more theorems
than α.
37
It is trivial from a theoretical perspective to design a learning heuristic that will utilize all consistent

52

this gendre. Our goal in this section will be to examine Section 5’s “R-View” θ and its
RE-Class(ξ).
Thus, θ will denote an R-View that consists of an arbitrary r.e. set of Πξ1 sentences.
Also, RE-Class(ξ) will again denote the set of all θ which can be built under ξ ’s
language of Lξ . (Section 5 had allowed both valid and invalid R-Views θ to appear
in RE-Class(ξ) because no recursive decision procedure can identify all the Standard-M
model’s true Πξ1 sentences.)
The epistemological purpose of this notation was revealed in Section 6. For the cases
where k = 0 or 1, Section 6 deﬁned Gξk ( θ ) to be the axiom system:
Gξk ( θ ) = θ ∪ B ξ ∪ SelfConsk { [ θ ∪ B ξ ] , d }

(52)

Also, Deﬁnition 6.2 indicated that the function Gξk (which maps θ onto Gξk ( θ ) ) would
be called Consistency Preserving iﬀ Gξk ( θ ) is assured to be consistent whenever all

the sentences in θ are true under the Standard-M model. Theorem 6.3 indicated, in
this context, that Gξ1 satisﬁes this property whenever ξ is EA-stable. Likewise, Gξ0
is consistency preserving whenever ξ is one of A-stable, E-stable or 0-stable.
These results indicate a trial-and-error experimental process can, indeed, walk in an
unusually orderly manner through an universe of self-reﬂecting candidate formalisms,
when RE-Class(ξ) denotes U ’s universe and ξ satisﬁes any of the EA-stable, E-stable,
A-stable or 0-stable conditions. This is because if θ designates a set of Πξ1 sentences

holding true in the Standard-M model, then Gξk (θ) will automatically satisfy both
Parts (i) and (ii) of Section 1’s deﬁnition of Self Justiﬁcation, according to Theorem 6.3.
Such consistency preservation is surprising because it is simply inapplicable to the Gξk
functions for most pairs (ξ, k). Theorem 6.3’s ﬁrst contribution is, thus, that it formalizes
how Gξk ’s mapping function can represent a type of approximation for instinctive faith,
under certain well-deﬁned circumstances.
This notion of instinctive faith is, of course, less robust than a conventional proof.
One obvious diﬃculty is that a 1-sentence proof, using an “I am consistent” axiom, is
less convincing than a full-length proof from ﬁrst principles. Also, if the initial formalism
θ contains a false Πξ1 sentence then B ξ + θ and Gξk (θ) will be both inconsistent.
axiom systems from its available universe U eventually, and it will spend only an inﬁnitesimal fraction
of its eﬀort on inconsistent systems as time runs to inﬁnity. (This because there exists only a countable
number of distinct r.e. sets belonging to the universe U. ) Also, this learning process can presumably be
made to employ some type of smart souped-up AI heuristics to enhance its eﬃciency, whose details will
not concern us in this abbreviated 3-page appendix. What is central to the current discussion is that
some type of formally non-recursive and presumably trial-and-error method must obviously be used by
this learning process to ﬁnd the consistent elements of U , on account of Gödel’s undecidability results.

53

Nevertheless for k equals 0 or 1, if θ is comprised of the true sentences in the
Standard-M model, then Theorem 6.3 will assure that Gξk (θ) is a consistent system
that has an ability to use its “I am consistent” axiom sentence to formalize its own
consistency. Moreover, the axiom system Gξk (θ) is helpful because Gödel’s famous
centennial paper implicitly raised the following bedeviling issue:
#

How is it that Human Beings manage to muster the physical drive to

think (and prove theorems) when the many generalizations of Gödel’s Second
Incompleteness Theorem demonstrate conventional logics lack knowledge of
their own consistency?
While philosophical paradoxes and ironical dilemmas, similar to # , never yield perfect answers, the preceding discussion is helpful because it explores a certain syllogism
whereby a logic can formalize at least some fragmented operational appreciation of its
own consistency.
Moreover, Part-3 of Appendix D indicated that its four self-justifying conﬁgurations
were close to being maximal results that cannot be much improved, on account of various
barriers imposed by the Second Incompleteness Theorem. Thus, these particular positive
results, combined with Theorems 5.9 6.3, 6.6, 6.10, 6.12, D.4, E.1, G.2, G.3 and Remarks
6.4 and 6.16, come close to formalizing the maximal variants of instinctive faith that a
ﬁrst-order logic can bolster.
The theme of the last two paragraphs is thus that our approximation of “instinctive
faith” may be imperfect, but it is still a useful partial reply to # ’s puzzling dilemma
in a context where unambiguous full resolutions to # are not permitted by the Second
Incompleteness Theorem. Furthermore, Equation (34)’s translational reﬂection principle,
together with Theorem 6.12 and the Remarks 6.13 and 6.14, illustrate how the notion
of an instinctive faith about the usefulness of Πξ1 theorems can be almost physically
hard-wired into self-justifying formalisms.
A Yet Further Facet of this Unusual Epistemological Interpretation: Let
the term Epistemological Bundle Theory refer to the underlying theory, advanced in
this appendix, which speculates about a Thinking Agent walking through RE-Class(ξ)’s
bundled universe of valid and invalid collections of Πξ1 sentences and then applying some
heuristic to attempt to identify those θ ∈ RE-Class(ξ) whose sentences are true under
the Standard-M model.

Such a theory has a second virtue, aside from addressing # ’s paradoxical question
about the nature of “instinctive faith”. It also clariﬁes the meaning of our main theorems
and the related E-stability, A-stability, EA-stability and RE-Class(ξ) constructs.

54

This is because the Items ∗ and ∗∗ from the deﬁnitions of A-stability and E-stability

in Section 5 formalize how a thinking agent T can view short proofs from a technically
inconsistent axiom system of B ξ ∪ θ as containing pragmatically useful information

under the assumption that the lengths of T ’s proofs are shorter than the errors in
θ ’s Πξ1 styled-statements. The pleasing aspect about this observation, illustrated by
Remark 5.2, is that those same invariants, ∗ and ∗∗ , which tempt a thinking agent T

to engage in a trial-and-error walk through RE-Class(ξ)’s bundled universe, also make
viable Theorem 5.9’s self-justifying formalisms.
Thus aside from addressing # ’s dilemma about the nature of instinctive faith, the

meta-formalism in this appendix is useful in explaining the motivation behind the elaborate network of theorems, proofs and deﬁnitions that were introduced in this paper.
In summary, EA-stable logics are thus interesting both in their own right (as a vehicle
enabling a Thinking Being to partially tolerate its own errors), and because they are
useful in explaining how a Thinking Being can possess a type of instinctive faith in its
own consistency (via the reﬂection principles of Theorem 6.12 and of Remarks 6.13 and
6.14).

Appendix G: Improvements upon Theorems 6.6 and 6.10
Let us recall that Remark 6.11 indicated that there was a subtle trade-oﬀ between
Theorems 6.6 and 6.10, where neither result was strictly better than the other. This
section will introduce two hybrid methodologies, using Deﬁnition G.1’s formalism, that
improve upon Theorem 6.10 while retaining a large part of Theorem 6.6’s nice features.
Definition G.1 Let ξ denote the generic conﬁguration, whose base axiom system
is again denoted as B ξ ,

Φ denote any Πξ1 sentence that is true in the Standard-M

model and j denote an index that represents some predicate Testξj lying in Deﬁnition
6.8’s TestListξ sequence. Then a Πξ1 sentences Ψ will be said to be a Bracedξ ( Φ , j )
expression when B ξ + Φ can prove:
{

∀x

Testξj ( ⌈ Ψ ⌉ , x ) }

−→

Ψ

(53)

Theorem G.2 Let ξ again denote an arbitrary generic configuration (Lξ , ∆ξ0 , B ξ , d, G),
and let (B, D) again denote any second axiom system and deduction method whose Πξ1
theorems are true under the Standard-M model. Then for any integer j and for any Πξ1

sentence Φ that is true in the Standard-M model, the following invariants do hold:
i If ξ is EA-stable then there will exist a self-justifying βj ⊃ B ξ that can recognize its
Level(1ξ ) consistency, contains only a finite number of additional axioms beyond

those appearing in B ξ , and which can prove all of (B, D)’s Πξ1 theorems that are

Bracedξ (Φ, j) expressions.

55

ii Likewise, if ξ is E-stable, A-stable or 0-stable then a self-justifying βj ⊃ B ξ will exist
with the same properties except that it recognizes its own Level(0ξ ) consistency.

Proof. To justify Theorem G.2, we must ﬁrst deﬁne the axiom system βj , whose
existence is claimed by Items (i) and (ii). It will be deﬁned to consist of the union of the
initial base axiom system B ξ with the following three added axiom-sentences.
1 The Πξ1 sentence Φ used by Deﬁnition G.1’s Bracedξ (Φ, j) formula.
2 A GlobSimD
B (ξ, j) sentence whose indexing integer j is deﬁned by Deﬁnition G.1.
This global simulation sentence is thus the statement:
ξ
∀ t ∀ q ∀ x { [ PrfD
B (t, q) ∧ Check (t) ]

−→

Testξj (t, x) }

(54)

3 A Πξ1 sentence of the form SelfConsk { [ θ ∪ B ξ ] , d } where:
a θ is an R-view consisting of the two Πξ1 sentences deﬁned by Items 1 and 2.
b B ξ is ξ ’s base axiom system, and
c k equals respectively 1 and 0 under formalisms (i) and (ii).
Thus, the system βj uses identical deﬁnitions under formalisms (i) and (ii), except that
its third sentence will use a diﬀerent value for k . Our proof of Theorem G.2 will require
ﬁrst conﬁrming the following fact:
Claim * The axiom system βj (which consists of the union of B ξ with the sentences
1-3) will have a capacity to prove every Bracedξ (Φ, j) sentence Ψ that is a Πξ1
theorem of (B, D).
The proof of Claim * is quite simple. It will rest on the following three observations:
a For each Πξ1 sentence Ψ, the system βj must certainly have a capacity to prove
(55)’s sentence (which states that Ψ ’s Gödel number formally encodes a Πξ1 statement). This is because (55) is true in the Standard-M model and because Part 3
of Deﬁnition 3.4 indicated that the B ξ sub-component of βj has a capacity to
prove every ∆ξ0 sentence that is true.
Checkξ ( ⌈ Ψ ⌉ )

(55)

b Since Claim ∗ speciﬁes Ψ is a theorem of (B, D), there must certainly exist some
integer N that is the Gödel number of its proof from (B, D). This implies that

(56) must be a true ∆ξ0 sentence under the Standard-M model. As was the case

with Equation (55), this implies that it must be provable from B ξ (because it is
a valid ∆ξ0 sentence).
PrfD
B ( ⌈Ψ⌉ , N )
56

(56)

c It is apparent that Equations (54), (55) and (56) imply the validity of (57). Moreover,
Part 4 of Deﬁnition 3.4 indicated that the generic conﬁguration ξ ’s deduction
method does satisfy Gödel’s Completeness Theorem. This fact assures that βj
must be able to prove (57) because it contains (54) as an axiom and (55) and (56)
as derived theorems 38 .
∀ x Testξj ( ⌈ Ψ ⌉ , x )

(57)

Claim ∗ is a consequence of Observations a-c. This is because Φ is one of βj ’s deﬁned
axioms, and Deﬁnition G.1 indicated B ξ + Φ was capable of proving (53)’s statement

for every Bracedξ (Φ, j) sentence Ψ . These facts corroborate Claim ∗ because they imply
that βj must be able to verify Claim ∗ ’s sentence Ψ (because βj can verify statements

(53) and (57)).

The remainder of Theorem G.2’s proof is analogous to Theorem 6.10’s proof. This is
because the prior paragraph established that βj can prove every Bracedξ (Φ, j) theorem
of (B, D) (as was required by Claims i and ii ). The only remaining task is to show

that βj is a self-justifying formalism that can recognize its Level(1ξ ) and Level(0ξ )
consistencies, as speciﬁed by Claims i and ii. This part of Theorem G.2’s veriﬁcation
is identical to the methods used to prove Theorems 6.3 and 6.10. It will thus not be
repeated here.

✷

The last part of this appendix will require the following additional notation to formalize the main intended application of Theorem G.2’s formalism.
1. Count(Ψ) will denote the number of quantiﬁers appearing in the sentence Ψ (including both its bounded and unbounded quantiﬁers).
2. Sizeξ (c) will denote the set of Πξ1 sentences Ψ where Count(Ψ) ≤ c .
Our next theorem will be a specialized variant of Theorem G.2, using the Sizeξ (c) construct. It will explain the intended application of this formalism:
Theorem G.3.
configurations of

ξ∗ ,

Let
ξ ∗∗ ,

ξ

denote any one of Appendix D’s four sample generic
ξ−

or ξ R . Then for any c > 0 , Theorem G.2’s axiom

systems of βj can be arranged so that they can prove all of (B, D)’s Sizeξ (c) Πξ1 theorems
while simultaneously also recognizing their:

1. Level(1) consistency for the cases when ξ is one of ξ ∗ , ξ ∗∗ or ξ − .
2. Level(0) consistency when ξ is ξ R .
38

Every deduction method d, satisfying Gödel’s Completeness Theorem, will be automatically able
to prove a theorem Z when it contains X, Y and (X ∧Y ) → Z as theorems, irregardless of whether or
not it contains an explicit built-in modus ponens rule. Thus d can prove (57) because of its knowledge
about (54)–(56)’s validity.

57

Proof Sketch: The intuition behind Theorem G.3’s proof is quite easy to summarize.
For arbitrary c > 0 and any of Appendix D’s conﬁgurations of ξ ∗ , ξ ∗∗ , ξ − and ξ R ,
it is routine to construct an ordered pair (Φ, j) where every Πξ1 sentence of Sizeξ (c) is
a Bracedξ (Φ, j) expression. Theorem G.3’s ﬁrst claim is, thus, a consequence of Part (i)
of Theorem G.2 and the fact that each of ξ ∗ , ξ ∗∗ and ξ − are EA-stable. Likewise,
Theorem G.3’s second claim follows from Part (ii) of Theorem G.2 and the fact that ξ R
is E-stable,

✷

Remark G.4. The Theorems G.2 and G.3 are of interest because the set of Πξ1
sentences of Sizeξ (c) is a natural class to examine. It is, thus, tempting to consider a
system that recognizes its own formal consistency, uses only a ﬁnite number of axiom
sentences beyond those in B ξ ,

and which can prove all of (B, D)’s Πξ1 theorems of

Sizeξ (c). Such a system replies to Remark 6.11’s challenge by hybridizing the properties
of Theorems 6.6 and 6.10, in a seemingly pragmatic manner.

58

References
[1] Z. Adamowicz, “Herbrand Consistency and Bounded Arithmetic”, Fundamenta
Mathematicae 171 (2002) pp. 279-292.
[2] Z. Adamowicz and T. Bigorajska, “Existentially Closed Structures and Gödel’s Second Incompleteness Theorem”, Journal of Symbolic Logic 66 (2001), pp. 349-356.
[3] Z. Adamowicz and P. Zbierski, “On Herbrand consistency in weak theories”,
Archives for Mathematical Logic 40(2001) 399-413
[4] T. Arai, “Derivability Conditions on Rosser’s Proof Predicates”, Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic 30(1990) 487-490
[5] L Berkemishev, “Iterated Local Reﬂection Versus Iterated Consistency”, Annals of
Pure and Applied Logic 75 (1995) pp. 25-48.
[6] L Berkemishev, “Induction Rules, Reﬂection Principles and Provably Recursive
Functions”, Annals of Pure and Applied Logic 85 (1997) pp. 193-242.
[7] L Berkemishev, “Proof Theoretic Analysis by Iterated Reﬂection”, Archives on
Mathematical Logic 42 (2003) pp. 515-552.
[8] A. Bezboruah and J. C. Shepherdson, “Gödel’s Second Incompleteness Theorem for
Q”, Journal of Symbolic Logic 41 (1976) pp. 503-512
[9] S. R. Buss, Bounded Arithmetic, (Ph D Thesis) Proof Theory Notes #3, Bibliopolis
1986.
[10] S. R. Buss and A. Ignjatovic, “Unprovability of Consistency Statements in Fragments of Bounded Arithmetic”, Annals of Pure and Applied Logic 74 (1995) pp.
221-244.
[11] S. Feferman, “Arithmetization of Mathematics in a General Setting”, Fundamenta
Mathematicae 49 (1960) pp. 35-92.
[12] M. Fitting, First Order Logic and Automated Theorem Proving, Springer-Verlag,
1996.
[13] H. M. Friedman, “Translatability and Relative Consistency”, Ohio State Tech Report, 1979.
[14] K. Gödel, “ Über formal unentscheidbare Sätze der Principia Mathematica und
verwandte Systeme I”, Monatshefte für Mathematik und Physik 37 (1931) pp. 349360.

59

[15] P. Hájek and P. Pudlák, Metamathematics of First Order Arithmetic, Springer Verlag 1991.
[16] D. Hilbert and P. Bernays, Grundlagen der Mathematic, Springer 1939.
[17] R. Jeroslow, “Consistency Statements in Mathematics ”, Fundamenta Math 72
(1971) pp.17-40.
[18] R. Kaye, Models of Peano Arithmetic, Oxford University Press, 1991.
[19] S. C. Kleene, “On the Notation of Ordinal Numbers”, Journal of Symbolic Logic 3
(1938), 150-156.
[20] L. A. Kolodziejczyk, Private Email Communications during November of 2005.
[21] L. A. Kolodziejczyk, “On the Herbrand Notion of Consistency for Finitely Axiomatizable Fragments of Bound Arithmetic”, Journal of Symbolic Logic 71 (2006) pp.
624-638.
[22] J. Krajı́cek, “A Note on Proofs of Falsehood”, Archives on Math Logic 26 (1987)
pp. 169-176.
[23] J. Krajı́cek, Bounded Propositional Logic and Complexity Theory, Cambridge University Press 1995.
[24] G. Kreisel and G. Takeuti, “Formally Self-Referential Propositions for Cut-Free
Classical Analysis”, Dissertationes Mathematicae 118 (1974) pp. 1–55
[25] M. H. Löb, A Solution to a Problem by Leon Henkin, Journal of Symbolic Logic 20
(1955) 115-118.
[26] E. Nelson, Predicative Arithmetic, Mathematics Notes Princeton U Press, 1986.
[27] R. Parikh, “Existence and Feasibility in Arithmetic”, Journal of Symbolic Logic 36
(1971), pp. 494-508
[28] J. B. Paris and C. Dimitracopoulos, “Truth Deﬁnition for ∆0 Formula”, Monagraphie de L’Ensignment Mathematique 30 (1982) pp. 317-329. (See especially the ﬁrst
two pages of this article to ﬁnd the counterpart of Lemma 3.6 in it.)
[29] J. B. Paris and C. Dimitracopoulos, “A Note on Undeﬁnability of Cuts”, Journal
Symbolic Logic 48 (1983) 564-569
[30] J. B. Paris and A. J. Wilkie, “∆0 Sets and Induction”, 1981 Jadswin Conference
Proceedings, pp. 237-248.
[31] C. Parsons, On n−Quantiﬁer Elimination, Journal of Symbolic Logic 37 (1972), pp.
466-482.
60

[32] P. Pudlák, “On Lengths of Proofs of Finistic Consistency Statements in First order
Theories”, Logic Colloquium 84, North Holland (1986) pp. 165-196.
[33] P. Pudlák, “Cuts, Consistency Statements and Interpretations”, Journal of Symbolic
Logic 50 (1985) 423-442
[34] P. Pudlák, “On the Lengths of Proofs of Consistency”, in Collegium Logicum: 1996
Annals of the Kurt Gödel Society ( Volume 2), Springer-Wien-NewYork, pp 65-86.
[35] H. Rogers, Recursive Functions and Effective Compatibility, McGrawHill 1967.
[36] J. B. Rosser, “Extensions of Some Theorems by Gödel and Church”, Journal of
Symbolic Logic 1 (1936) pp. 87-91.
[37] S. Salehi, Herbrandized Consistency of Some Finite Fragments of Bounded Arithmetic Theories (CoRR 2011) http://arxiv.org/abs/1110.1848.
[38] C. A. Smoryński, The Incompleteness Theorem, Handbook on Mathematical Logic,
pp. 821–866, 1977.
[39] C. A. Smoryński, “Non-standard Models and Related Developments in the Work
of Harvey Friedman”, in Harvey Friedman’s Research in the Foundations of Mathematics, NH 1985, pp 179-229.
[40] R. Smullyan, First Order Logic, Springer-Verlag, 1968.
[41] R. M. Solovay, “Interpretability in set theories”. Unpublished letter to Petr Hájek
dated August 17, 1976 and available on Petr Hájek’s home page.
[42] R. M. Solovay, “Provability Interpretations in Modal Logics”, Israel Journal of
Mathematics 25 (1976) pp. 278-304.
[43] R. M. Solovay, “Injecting Inconsistencies into Models of PA”, Annals Pure and
Applied Logic” 44(1988) 102-132
[44] R. M. Solovay, Private communications in 1994 describing Solovay’s generalization of
one of Pudlák’s theorems [33], using the additional formalisms of Nelson and WilkieParis [26, 58]. Solovay never published this result (called Theorem 2.1 in Section 2)
or his other observations that several logicians [15, 26, 29, 30, 33, 34, 41, 46, 58]
have attributed to his private communications. The Appendix A of [61] oﬀers our
4-page interpretation of Solovay’s basic suggestion. See also reference [41] for a pdf
ﬁle consisting of Solovay’s earlier unpublished 1976 letter to Petr Hájek.
[45] V. Švejdar, ”Modal Analysis of Rosser Sentences”, Journal of Symbolic Logic 48
(1983) 986-999.

61

[46] V. Švejdar, ”An Interpretation of Robinson Arithmetic in its Grzegorczjk’s Weaker
Variant” Fundamenta Informaticae 81 (2007) pp. 347-354.
[47] G. Takeuti, “On a Generalized Logical Calculi”, Japan Journal of Mathematics 32
(1953) pp. 39-96.
[48] G. Takeuti, Proof Theory, Studies in Logic Volume 81, North Holland, 1987.
[49] G. Takeuti, “Gödel Sentences of Bounded Arithmetic”, Journal of Symbolic Logic
65 (2000) 1338-1346.
[50] A. Tarski, “Der Wahrheitsbegriﬀ in den formalisisierten Sprachen”, Studia Philosphie. 1 (1936) 261-405
[51] A. Tarski, A. Mostowski and R. M. Robinson, Undecidable Theories, North Holland,
1953.
[52] R, Verbrugge and A. Visser, “A Small Reﬂection Principle for Bounded Arithmetic”,
Journal of Symbolic Logic 59 (1994) pp. 785-812.
[53] A. Visser, “Peano’s Smart Children: A Provability Logical Study of Systems with
Built-in Consistency”, Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic, 30 (1987) pp. 161-196.
[54] A. Visser, “An Inside View of Exp”, Journal of Symbolic Logic 57 (1992) 131–165.
[55] A. Visser, “The Unprovability of Small Inconsistency”, Archive for Math Logic 32
(1993) pp. 275-298.
[56] A. Visser, “Faith and Falsity”, Annals of Pure and Applied Logic 131 (2005) pp.
103-131.
[57] P. Vopěnka and P. Hájek, “Existence of a Generalized Semantic Model of GödelBernays Set Theory”, Bulletin de l’Academie Polonaise des Sciences, Math, Astromiques et Physiques 12 (1973) 1079-1086.
[58] A. J. Wilkie and J. B. Paris, “On the Scheme of Induction for Bounded Arithmetic”,
Annals of Pure and Applied Logic (35) 1987, 261-302.
[59] D. Willard, “Self-Verifying Axiom Systems”, Computational Logic and Proof
Theory: The Third Kurt Gödel Colloquium (1993), Springer-Verlag LNCS#713,
325-336.
[60] D. Willard, “The Semantic Tableaux Version of the Second Incompleteness Theorem
Extends Almost to Robinson’s Arithmetic Q”, Automated Reasoning with Analytic
Tableaux and Related Methods, Springer Verlag (2000) LNCS#1847, pp. 415-430.

62

[61] D. Willard, “Self-Verifying Systems, the Incompleteness Theorem and Related Reﬂection Principles”, in Journal of Symbolic Logic 66 (2001) pp. 536-596.
[62] D. Willard, “How to Extend The Semantic Tableaux And Cut-Free Versions of
the Second Incompleteness Theorem Almost to Robinson’s Arithmetic”, Journal of
Symbolic Logic 67 (2002) pp. 465–496.
[63] D. Willard, “A Version of the Second Incompleteness Theorem For Axiom Systems
that Recognize Addition But Not Multiplication as a Total Function”, First Order
Logic Revisited, Logos Verlag (Berlin) 2004, pp. 337–368.
[64] D. Willard, “An Exploration of the Partial Respects in which an Axiom System
Recognizing Solely Addition as a Total Function Can Verify Its Own Consistency”,
Journal of Symbolic Logic 70 (2005) pp. 1171-1209.
[65] D. Willard, “On the Available Partial Respects in which an Axiomatization for Real
Valued Arithmetic Can Recognize its Consistency”, Journal of Symbolic Logic 71
(2006) pp. 1189-1199.
[66] D. Willard, “A Generalization of the Second Incompleteness Theorem and Some
Exceptions to It”. Annals of Pure and Applied Logic 141 (2006) pp. 472-496.
[67] D. Willard, “Passive induction and a solution to a Paris-Wilkie question”, Annals
of Pure and Applied Logic 146(2007) pp. 124-149.
[68] D. Willard, “Some Specially Formulated Axiomizations for IΣ0 Manage to Evade
the Herbrandized Version of the Second Incompleteness Theorem”, Information and
Computation 207(2009) 1078-1093
[69] C. Wrathall, “Rudimentary Predicates and Relative Computation”, Siam Journal
on Computing 7 (1978), pp 194-209

63

