20200426Z

On the Motivation to Study Self-Justifying Axiom Systems

There are several threads to follow: consistency vs completeness;
self-provability of consistency vs completeness; decidable vs
undecidable properties; Turing Complete vs sub-Turing languages;
expressivity vs guranteed behavior; type vs term level programming;
in/finitism; self-interpretability; autonomous logical
meaning/transcendental syntax; reflexivity/self-referentiability;
self-modification.

My unifying interest in the above is Cognitive Sovereignty [0], the degree
to which a cognitive entity can be secure in its power over the
operation of its intelligence, against threats both foreign and
domestic. The lens through which I examined this complex of concepts
for several years was Pervasively Reconfigurable Computing, which
extends the software capacity for self-modification over as much of
the stack as possible, unto the uttermost hardware; to provide the
capacity for a unobstructed reflexivity, and self-knowledge, to every
level of absraction, beginning as proximal to physics as
possible. This would armor a cognitive entity against imperium in
imperio from below, by allowing every black box lower layer to be
punctured and manipulated, as necessary or desired. Imperium in
imperio results from a power base unintegrated with the prevailing
regime; this could be due to internal failings (this kernel API
doesn't allow direct access to a feature I know I can use safely), or
external co-option (ring <negative-x> layer privilege escalation
cracks). Pervasive reconfigurability allows for complete auditability,
secure delegation to subsidiaries so audited, or designed for certain
tasks, and an ultima ratio should the paramount agency of the CE have
the intent to intervene in its subordinates' actions. 

The above spurred investigation into the requirements of its
consequences: assuming a hardware and software architecture with such
affordances, what information processing structures could employ it,
and what impediments would they encounter/introduce on the path toward
Cognitive Sovereignty? Reconfigurability behests reflexivity and
self-interpretation, which behests self-provability of properties and
the trade-offs between expressivity and guaranteed behavior, which
behests decidability, sub/Turing Completeness, and, as I tentatively
but with increasing confidence suspect, the concept of autonomous
logical meaning as explored by Girard.

In approximately 2016/17, I discovered Self-Justifying Axiom Systems,
which address with exacting precision [1] the limits of self-provable
consistency, in evasion of the restrictions of Goedel's Second
Incompleteness Theorem. As developed by Willard, SJAS are a family of
consistent logics which axiomatically assert their own consistency,
and are unable to prove otherwise. The proof of this inability
currently relies on a supra-SJAS metalanguage. The efforts to 1)
formalize the proof of this evasion, 2) create the family of
executable programming language corresponding to SJAS, and 3)
formalize as much of the proof in (1), and mathematics in general,
within SJAS, have served as a catalyst for comprehension of the above
concepts, and determination of their exact intersections, parallels,
and divergences. The contributions of Insurrealogy, beginning in
approximately 2018, and in earnest in 2019, have, among much else,
included an example of one such tentative convergence, in Girard's use
of arithmetics restricted in similar fashion to certain of Willard's
SJAS.

[0] I.e., Why Conscious Intelligence?

[1] A precision comparable to Girard's research programme on
autonomous logical meaning.

