20270820Z

SJAS Synthesis

[Orientation document for the codification and refinement of the SJAS literature.]

Willard developed SJAS across many presentations over nearly 30 years of research. He experimented with multiple formalisms of a common underlying idea, at times variegating (e.g. finite vs infinite axiomatizations), extending (e.g. Herbrand consistency), applying (the floating point paper, and possibly ZF manuscript), and unifying (2005 and 2011) the conceptual instances explored. These multiple approaches provide a body of sample data that, like a point cloud or burst of photographs, illustrate the artifact of SJAS from consilient perspectives; however, one of the core lessons of SJAS is that the properties of a formal system can be delicately sensitive to its precise definition. Applied to these overlapping but not entirely coincident variations, this lesson argues for caution before assuming SJAS _as a coherent object_ is understood, strictly as a function of the collection of _publications on SJAS_. Insofar as SJAS per se is a desirable target for study and comprehension, Willard's literature ought be synthesizable into a single, mature statement, which further research might grow from, respond to, and integrate. This "Codified SJAS" will abstract over contingencies, de-duplicate replicated context, and clarify the motivation, articulation, and demonstration of Willard's essential results. An immediate consequence of the Codified SJAS will be a "Refined SJAS"; taking inspiration from Lev Beklemishev's claim of a simplified presentation of SJAS, the essential _idea_ of SJAS will be identified and explicated. This Refinement may deviate from Willard proper, e.g. by formulating the evasion of G2 in terms of Lawvere's Fixed-Point Theorem, or deriving the SJAS consistency preservation results from a Rosser's Trick analogue. Beyond its own value, the further, near term goal of this Codification and Refinement is to support the ongoing investigation into computational analogues and correspondences of self-justification and self-justifying axiom systems, and the extension/equivalents of self-justification in other domains.
